Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  Installing Node.js

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

Node.js is a JavaScript runtime environment that allows you to run JavaScript
outside of your web browser. We will need this for some exercises in the
upcoming lessons. To get started, there are some required tools we need before
we can install Node on your system.

We’re going to install it using `nvm` (Node Version Manager), because it makes
it easy to change Node versions and upgrade Node. There is another tool called
`npm` (Node Package Manager) that you will use later to install the various
libraries and tools used in JavaScript environments. It can be easy to confuse
these two, so read carefully!

Node is also very easy to install using nvm, so this should go quickly :)

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * Learn how to Install Node Version Manager and Node Package Manager
  * Learn how to run Node console

### Installing NVM

Installation on Linux

#### Step 0: Prerequisites

To install nvm properly, you’ll need `curl`. Simply run the command below:

    
    
    sudo apt install curl
    

Note: You may need to update the Ubuntu package lists to the latest version
for the Curl installation to complete. If so, run the command below:

    
    
    sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade
    

#### Step 1: Downloading and installing NVM

Simply run this command:

    
    
    curl -o- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nvm-sh/nvm/v0.39.5/install.sh | bash
    

This will install `nvm`

#### Step 2: Initializing NVM

In the terminal there should be some directions on how to initialize `nvm`. If
not, (or if you don’t feel like copying from the terminal), run these
commands:

    
    
    export NVM_DIR="$([ -z "${XDG_CONFIG_HOME-}" ] && printf %s "${HOME}/.nvm" || printf %s "${XDG_CONFIG_HOME}/nvm")"
    [ -s "$NVM_DIR/nvm.sh" ] && \. "$NVM_DIR/nvm.sh" # This loads nvm
    

You can verify `nvm` is installed by running the command:

    
    
    command -v nvm
    

if this returns `nvm: command not found`, close the terminal and re-open it.

Installation on macOS

On macOS 10.15 and above, the default shell is now zsh. During installation,
nvm will look for a `.zshrc` file in your user home directory. By default,
this file does not exist so we need to create it.

To create the `.zshrc` file and start the nvm installation, run the following
commands:

    
    
    touch ~/.zshrc
    
    
    
    curl -o- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nvm-sh/nvm/v0.39.5/install.sh | bash
    

Restart your terminal, or copy and paste the following into your terminal and
press `Enter`:

    
    
    export NVM_DIR="$HOME/.nvm"
    [ -s "$NVM_DIR/nvm.sh" ] && \. "$NVM_DIR/nvm.sh" # This loads nvm
    [ -s "$NVM_DIR/bash_completion" ] && \. "$NVM_DIR/bash_completion" # This loads nvm bash_completion
    

Test your nvm installation by running:

    
    
    nvm --version
    

For more information, view [NVM’s github
documentation](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm#installation-and-update).

### Installing Node

Now that we have `nvm` installed, we can install Node.

#### Step 1: Installation

Run:

    
    
    nvm install --lts
    

This will install the most recent stable version of Node in ‘long-term
support’ (LTS), and you’ll see a lot of output in the terminal. If everything
worked, you should see something similar to this somewhere in the lines of
output (with the X’s replaced with actual numbers):

    
    
    Downloading and installing Node vXX.xx.x...
    

If not, close the terminal, re-open it and run `nvm install --lts` again.

#### Step 2: Setting the Node version

We need to tell `nvm` which version of Node to use when we run the `node`
command. It’s easy; just run the following command:

    
    
    nvm use --lts
    

We have told `nvm` to use the most recent LTS version of Node installed on our
computer. You **must** use the LTS version of Node to avoid incompatibilities
with packages we will be installing in future lessons. The LTS version of Node
is simply a version that is guaranteed support for thirty months after its
initial release. It is more stable and compatible with a variety of packages
than a non-LTS version of Node.

Now when you run `node -v`, you should see `vXX.xx.x` or something similar
(with the X’s replaced with actual numbers).

If you see that, you have successfully installed Node!

### Using Node console

For convenience, Node provides an interactive console which lets you run and
edit your javascript code right in your terminal, similar to IRB for ruby.
This is quite helpful to debug or test small snippets of your code quickly
without opening the browser every time.

To run the Node console, open up your terminal and type `node`. Type `.exit`
to quit the console.

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * It looks like this lesson doesn’t have any additional resources yet. Help us expand this section by contributing to our curriculum.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/foundations/javascript_basics/installing_nodejs.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-installing-
node-
js&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Installing+Node.js%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-fundamentals-part-4)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

