Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Advanced HTML and CSS](/assets/badge-html-
css-91bc8d9c7ebb2e2f73eeb302c38a92d9ba6f182301dbd1868d7198fcc8376aeb.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/advanced-html-and-css)

#  Introduction to Responsive Design

[

##  Advanced HTML and CSS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/advanced-
html-and-css)

### Introduction

“Responsive Design” is an incredibly important concept when it comes to
developing for the web. In many ways, you are already equipped to create
beautiful responsive websites. In this section we’re going to fill in the
gaps.

### Learning outcomes

  * You’ll learn what “Responsive Design” is and why it’s important.

### Terminology

“Responsive Design” is the term used to describe creating websites that
_respond_ to changes in browser size in order to create something that works
on any device. Unfortunately, that phrase is a little bit misleading, due to
the word ‘design’. These lessons are not going to focus much on the actual
_design_ of responsive websites, but the techniques you can use to implement
responsiveness on websites.

The word ‘design’ refers to making decisions about what kinds of things look
nice, crafting a user experience, and deciding exactly what a project should
look like. There might be some tidbits about that sprinkled throughout these
lessons, but it is not the primary focus. _However_ , since this phrase has
been pretty much universally adopted, it’s the phrase we’ll use here.

### So what is it?

Since the release of the first iPhone in 2007, it has become a _requirement_
that your web projects function correctly on everything from normal desktop
monitors to tiny phone screens.

As you have likely discovered, this kind of responsiveness doesn’t often
happen automatically, especially once your projects get more complex than
simple text on a page (your first HTML-only recipe project probably worked
just fine on a phone, aside from the images getting cut off). So, when it
comes down to it, “Responsive Web Design” is a set of techniques you can use
to make your sites work on any size screen.

There are ways to make your designs flexible enough that they work well on
most screens, and there are ways to dramatically change the layout of your
page at certain sizes. You’ll probably end up relying on both in most of your
projects.

### What screens sizes should you support?

The smallest phones in common circulation rarely get smaller than `320px`, so
that should serve as a reliable lower end target. If your website works as low
as `320px` width, then it should work on any small device. The upper limit is
a little harder to clarify. These days super-duper-ultra-wide monitors aren’t
uncommon, so you should plan for the possibility that your site could be
viewed on some ridiculously wide monitor. Often, this is accomplished by
setting up a max-width for _all_ of your content and then centering that on
the page. With a setup like that your content will look fine even on super-
wide resolutions.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * What is Responsive Design?

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * As usual, MDN has a great article on [Responsive Design](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/CSS_layout/Responsive_Design), but it goes quite a bit deeper than we need right now.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/advanced_html_css/responsive_design/introduction_to_responsive_design.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-advanced-html-
and-css-introduction-to-responsive-
design&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Introduction+to+Responsive+Design%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/advanced-html-and-css) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/node-path-advanced-html-and-css-natural-responsiveness)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

