Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Ruby](/assets/badge-
ruby-d91c1849066ed424531394e9d693dd99aaef49bcee15a96f462a1ae54c359af0.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-rails/courses/ruby)

#  Basic Data Types

[

##  Ruby Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-rails/courses/ruby)

### Introduction

Ruby is a strongly object-oriented language, which means that absolutely
everything in Ruby is an object, even the most basic data types. We’ll start
here with four of Ruby’s basic data types: numbers (integers and floats),
strings, symbols, and Booleans (`true`, `false`, and `nil`).

For all of the examples throughout this lesson, feel free to follow along in
irb or [replit.com](https://replit.com/languages/ruby) (an online REPL
environment) to get a better feel for how they work.

### Learning outcomes

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to do the following:

  * List the basic arithmetic operators and what they do.
  * Describe the difference between an integer and a float and how to convert between the two.
  * Explain string interpolation and concatenation.
  * Describe what escape characters are, and list several examples.
  * Define what a symbol is and how it differs from a string.
  * Explain what the Booleans `true`, `false`, and `nil` represent.

### Numbers

You probably already know what numbers are, so there’s no need to go into
elaborate metaphors here. Ruby has all the typical math operators you would
expect:

    
    
    # Addition
    1 + 1   #=> 2
    
    # Subtraction
    2 - 1   #=> 1
    
    # Multiplication
    2 * 2   #=> 4
    
    # Division
    10 / 5  #=> 2
    
    # Exponent
    2 ** 2  #=> 4
    3 ** 4  #=> 81
    
    # Modulus (find the remainder of division)
    8 % 2   #=> 0  (8 / 2 = 4; no remainder)
    10 % 4  #=> 2  (10 / 4 = 2 with a remainder of 2)
    

#### Integers and floats

There are two main types of numbers in Ruby. **Integers** are whole numbers,
such as 10. **Floats** are numbers that contain a decimal point, such as 10.5,
10.0, or 0.25.

It’s important to keep in mind that when doing arithmetic with two integers in
Ruby, _the result will always be an integer_.

    
    
    17 / 5    #=> 3, not 3.4
    

To obtain an accurate answer, just replace one of the integers in the
expression with a float.

    
    
    17 / 5.0  #=> 3.4
    

#### Converting number types

Ruby makes it very easy to convert floats to integers and vice versa.

    
    
    # To convert an integer to a float:
    13.to_f   #=> 13.0
    
    # To convert a float to an integer:
    13.0.to_i #=> 13
    13.9.to_i #=> 13
    

As shown in the last example above, when Ruby converts a float to an integer,
the decimal places are simply cut off. Ruby doesn’t do any rounding in this
conversion.

#### Some useful number methods

There are many useful methods for numbers built into Ruby. For example,

**#even?**

    
    
    6.even? #=> true
    7.even? #=> false
    

**#odd?**

    
    
    6.odd? #=> false
    7.odd? #=> true
    

### Strings

Strings, strings, wonderful things, use them well and…your app will…grow
wings? Or something.

At first glance, you might think that strings are just a bunch of characters
that aren’t very useful beyond getting user input and outputting some
information to the screen, but like Burt Reynolds passing up the chance to
play Han Solo, you’d be wrong. Very wrong. What were you thinking, Burt?

#### Double and single quotation marks

Strings can be formed with either double `""` or single`''` quotation marks,
also known as _string literals_. They are pretty similar, but there are some
differences. Specifically, string interpolation and the escape characters that
we’ll discuss soon both only work inside double quotation marks, not single
quotation marks.

#### Concatenation

In true Ruby style, there are plenty of ways to concatenate strings.

    
    
    # With the plus operator:
    "Welcome " + "to " + "Odin!"    #=> "Welcome to Odin!"
    
    # With the shovel operator:
    "Welcome " << "to " << "Odin!"  #=> "Welcome to Odin!"
    
    # With the concat method:
    "Welcome ".concat("to ").concat("Odin!")  #=> "Welcome to Odin!"
    

Classic Ruby!

#### Substrings

You can access strings inside strings. Stringception! It’s super easy, too.

    
    
    "hello"[0]      #=> "h"
    
    "hello"[0..1]   #=> "he"
    
    "hello"[0, 4]   #=> "hell"
    
    "hello"[-1]     #=> "o"
    

In the above example we can access the individual characters of a string by
referencing the index(es) of the character within the string using `[]`. For
more information on the topic you can read the [method
documentation](https://ruby-doc.org/3.2.2/String.html#class-String-label-
String+Slices).

#### Escape characters

Escape characters allow you to type in representations of whitespace
characters and to include quotation marks inside your string without
accidentally ending it. As a reminder, escape characters only work inside
double quotation marks.

    
    
    \\  #=> Need a backslash in your string?
    \b  #=> Backspace
    \r  #=> Carriage return, for those of you that love typewriters
    \n  #=> Newline. You'll likely use this one the most.
    \s  #=> Space
    \t  #=> Tab
    \"  #=> Double quotation mark
    \'  #=> Single quotation mark
    

The best thing to do is play around with them in irb or a REPL.

    
    
    irb(main):001:0> puts "Hello \n\nHello"
    Hello
    
    Hello
    => nil
    

#### Interpolation

String interpolation allows you to evaluate a string that contains placeholder
variables. This is a very useful and common technique, so you will likely find
yourself using this often. Be sure to use double quotes so that string
interpolation will work!

    
    
    name = "Odin"
    
    puts "Hello, #{name}" #=> "Hello, Odin"
    puts 'Hello, #{name}' #=> "Hello, #{name}"
    

#### Common string methods

There are many useful string methods that are built into Ruby. You need to
capitalize a word? No problem! Reverse a string? Easy peasy. Extract the
binary subatomic algorithm from any regex grep? We don’t know, but since this
is Ruby, let’s go with _YES_.

Just remember, strings have loads of methods provided to you for free, and you
can find them all in the [Ruby docs](https://ruby-doc.org/3.2.2/String.html).
If you’re working with strings and need to do something, check the Ruby docs
first and see if there’s a method that does it for you.

Below is a quick recap of the more common string methods you might find
yourself using:

**#capitalize**

    
    
    "hello".capitalize #=> "Hello"
    

**#include?**

    
    
    "hello".include?("lo")  #=> true
    
    "hello".include?("z")   #=> false
    

**#upcase**

    
    
    "hello".upcase  #=> "HELLO"
    

**#downcase**

    
    
    "Hello".downcase  #=> "hello"
    

**#empty?**

    
    
    "hello".empty?  #=> false
    
    "".empty?       #=> true
    

**#length**

    
    
    "hello".length  #=> 5
    

**#reverse**

    
    
    "hello".reverse  #=> "olleh"
    

**#split**

    
    
    "hello world".split  #=> ["hello", "world"]
    
    "hello".split("")    #=> ["h", "e", "l", "l", "o"]
    

**#strip**

    
    
    " hello, world   ".strip  #=> "hello, world"
    

You’ll read more about these methods and others in the assignment. The
examples below are just to get your creative juices flowing with some of the
awesome ways you can modify strings.

    
    
    "he77o".sub("7", "l")           #=> "hel7o"
    
    "he77o".gsub("7", "l")          #=> "hello"
    
    "hello".insert(-1, " dude")     #=> "hello dude"
    
    "hello world".delete("l")       #=> "heo word"
    
    "!".prepend("hello, ", "world") #=> "hello, world!"
    

The assignments will go much deeper, so go through them thoroughly and be sure
to play around in a REPL as you read.

#### Converting other objects to strings

Using the `to_s` method, you can convert pretty much anything to a string.
Here are some examples:

    
    
    5.to_s        #=> "5"
    
    nil.to_s      #=> ""
    
    :symbol.to_s  #=> "symbol"
    

### Symbols

Symbols are an interesting twist on the idea of a string. The full explanation
can be a bit long, but here’s the short version:

Strings can be changed, so every time a string is used, Ruby has to store it
in memory even if an existing string with the same value already exists.
Symbols, on the other hand, are stored in memory only once, making them faster
in certain situations.

One common application where symbols are preferred over strings are the keys
in hashes. We’ll cover this in detail in the hashes lesson later in the
course.

You won’t need to use symbols much in the beginning, but it’s good to get
familiar with what they are and what they look like so that you can recognize
them.

#### Create a symbol

To create a symbol, simply put a colon at the beginning of some text:

    
    
    :my_symbol
    

#### Symbols vs. strings

To get a better idea of how symbols are stored in memory, give this a whirl in
irb or a REPL. The [`#object_id` method](https://ruby-
doc.org/3.2.2/Object.html#method-i-object_id) returns an integer identifier
for an object. (And remember: in Ruby, _everything_ is an object!)

    
    
    "string" == "string"  #=> true
    
    "string".object_id == "string".object_id  #=> false
    
    :symbol.object_id == :symbol.object_id    #=> true
    

### Booleans

You will learn about these data types in more detail in the Conditional Logic
lesson later in this course. The goal of this lesson is for you to get a basic
understanding of what Booleans are.

#### True and false

The Boolean values `true` and `false` represent exactly what you think they
do: `true` represents something that is true, and `false` represents something
that is false.

#### Nil

In Ruby, `nil` represents “nothing”. Everything in Ruby has a return value.
When a piece of code doesn’t have anything to return, it will return `nil`.
This is pretty abstract, but it will make more sense as you learn and use Ruby
more.

### Assignment

  1. Read the [Basics chapter](https://launchschool.com/books/ruby/read/basics) of LaunchSchool’s _Introduction to Programming With Ruby_ for a different explanation of Ruby’s data types.
  2. [Read Alex Chaffee’s brief writeup on Objects](https://web.archive.org/web/20190205073042/http://codelikethis.com/lessons/learn_to_code/objects), for a basic understanding of what objects are in programming. We will explore this topic much deeper later in the course.
  3. Now it is time to complete some test-driven exercises to practice what you have learned in this lesson. 
    * Follow the cloning and installation instructions in the main README to set up our [ruby-exercise repo](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/ruby-exercises).
    * Then follow the instructions in the [ruby-basics README](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/ruby-exercises/tree/main/ruby_basics) to complete the `1_data_types` exercises.
    * If you get stuck, ask questions in the #ruby-help channel in our Discord server.
    * After you have completed the exercises, check out the solutions branch on GitHub to compare solutions.

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * If you want to go deeper into Ruby’s numbers and string data types, read these chapters from the _Bastards Book of Ruby_ : 
    * [Numbers](http://ruby.bastardsbook.com/chapters/numbers/)
    * [Strings](http://ruby.bastardsbook.com/chapters/strings/)
  * Read through these Ruby Monstas sections about data types: 
    * [Numbers](http://ruby-for-beginners.rubymonstas.org/built_in_classes/numbers.html)
    * [Strings](http://ruby-for-beginners.rubymonstas.org/built_in_classes/strings.html)
    * [Symbols](http://ruby-for-beginners.rubymonstas.org/built_in_classes/symbols.html)
    * [True, False, and Nil](http://ruby-for-beginners.rubymonstas.org/built_in_classes/true_false_nil.html)

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * Numbers 
    * What are the basic arithmetic operators you can use on numbers? 
    * What’s the difference between an integer and a float?
    * What method would you use to convert a float to an integer?
    * What method would you use to convert an integer to a float?
  * Strings 
    * What is a string?
    * What are the differences between single and double quotes?
    * What is string interpolation?
    * How do you concatenate strings?
    * What method would you use to change all the characters in your string to upper case?
    * What method would you use to split up strings into arrays?
    * What are escape characters?
    * How do you access a specific character or substring?
    * How do you convert other data types into strings?
  * Symbols 
    * What is a symbol?
    * How do you create a symbol?
    * What’s the difference between a symbol and a string?
  * Booleans 
    * What does `true` represent?
    * What does `false` represent?
    * What does `nil` represent?

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/ruby/basic_ruby/basic_data_types.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fruby-basic-data-
types&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Basic+Data+Types%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-
rails/courses/ruby) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to
next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/ruby-variables)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

