Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![React](/assets/badge-
react-d347c579ca6df9afc0ef4127bb4fe6dc4002be06cb241f4d70b37c412f56cec2.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/react)

#  Introduction To React

[

##  React Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/react)

### Introduction

This lesson will provide you with information on what React is, its brief
history, and why we’re choosing to cover it in our curriculum.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * Understand what is React

### What is React?

React according to their [official website](https://react.dev/) is “The
library for web and native interfaces” however let’s break this down a bit
further.

Generally speaking, a JavaScript library is a collection of pre-written code
that’s designed to make development easier, not to be confused with frameworks
however as you’ll be reading the differences later on in the lesson. This code
can be reused/reimplemented in our own codebases to achieve complex tasks.
That said, the terms library and framework are often used interchangeably, so
don’t worry too much about the difference.

Similarly, React provides powerful primitives (built-in functions/modules)
that allow us to build user interfaces of varying complexities. Throughout
this course, we’ll learn all about the functionality React provides and learn
to build cool applications.

### Why cover React?

React is one of the most powerful, widely used JavaScript libraries.

The landscape for frontend frameworks has been changing a lot over the last
few years, so it is understandable to be worried about choosing the “wrong”
one. [This article on the lifecycle of JavaScript
frameworks](https://iamtapan.medium.com/this-is-how-long-the-life-cycle-of-a-
javascript-framework-lasts-d21b29320512) shows the recent development of
frontend frameworks well. Once you start diving deeper into a framework, you
will begin to love it. It makes your code easily scalable, more readable, and
possibly a thousand times more efficient (just our modest estimation).

Just to name a few reasons on why to learn React:

  * Reusability of components
  * Well supported due to its popularity and large community
  * React is not opinionated, which means that it won’t force you to follow any specific design patterns, project organizational structure, or logic. It’s all up to you.
  * A smaller learning curve, especially when you already have a good grasp of JavaScript and HTML/CSS from our previous lessons.

If you need more convincing, the recent [2023 StackOverflow Developer
Survey](https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2023/#section-most-popular-
technologies-web-frameworks-and-technologies) should be reason enough to get
excited about learning React. Still unsure? Check out [this article on why you
should learn React](https://medium.com/@SilentHackz/top-10-reasons-why-you-
should-learn-react-right-now-f7b0add7ec0d).

### Assignment

  1. If you haven’t already, browse through the [React Website](https://react.dev/). Don’t go too in-depth and dive into documentation however do read the introduction/homepage to gauge an idea of how React works.

  2. Glance at [this article which outlines the history of React](https://blog.risingstack.com/the-history-of-react-js-on-a-timeline/).

  3. Read this [FreeCodeCamp article discussing the differences between a JavaScript library and a framework](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/the-difference-between-a-framework-and-a-library-bd133054023f/).

  4. Lastly, skim this [in-depth article which explains the major benefits of using React](https://www.peerbits.com/blog/reasons-to-choose-reactjs-for-your-web-development-project.html).

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * What is the purpose of React?
  * What are the benefits of using React?

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * If you are interested in learning more about React’s history, check out [this documentary on React’s origin story by Honeypot](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8pDqJVdNa44)

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/react/introduction/introduction_to_react.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-react-new-
introduction-to-
react&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Introduction+To+React%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/react) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-react-new-setting-up-
a-react-environment)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

