Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![NodeJS](/assets/badge-
nodejs-1432a58382afd13f5bf55d4e5eda07244a3aa5fae9cee98ea034f17d6a09d503.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

#  Getting Started

[

##  NodeJS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

### Introduction

Like we learned in the introduction lesson, Node.js is really just JavaScript.
So a basic understanding of JavaScript is necessary in order to understand
Node. For this reason, it is highly recommended that you take our prerequisite
[JavaScript course](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/javascript) before continuing with this course.

This lesson will take you through a tutorial that will teach you the basic
modules and functions that you need to get up and running with Node.js. The
project that comes at the end of this section will ask you to use Node to
create a basic website that will include an `Index`, `About` and `Contact Me`
page. So while learning the topics in this lesson, be on the lookout for
things that might help you complete the project.

### Important notice

Recently the NodeJS.dev team removed a large amount of content from their
website. Several of those removed pages were linked to in this lesson. Until
we find a replacement for that content we will be linking directly to the
markdown files on their GitHub repository. The formatting may look a bit odd,
but the content should still be just as good.

### Learning outcomes

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to do the following:

  * Explain some things that Node.js is commonly used for.
  * Create and use modules in Node.js (both built-in and user created).
  * Set up a basic webserver with Node.js using the HTTP module.
  * Read, create, update, and delete files from Node.js.
  * Use the URL module to parse a url address and split it into readable parts.
  * Understand how to use NPM.
  * Create, fire and listen for your own events.

### Assignment

  * Let’s dive in and start looking at Node server-side code! We will be hopping around lessons in the [NodeJS.org](https://nodejs.org/en/learn) docs which you should follow along. 
    * Get Started 
      * Learn how to run Node.js scripts from the terminal in [this](https://nodejs.org/en/learn/command-line/run-nodejs-scripts-from-the-command-line) lesson.
      * Learn quickly about .env files and how we use them [here](https://nodejs.org/en/learn/command-line/how-to-read-environment-variables-from-nodejs)! This will become very important in the future when working with databases and other sensitive credentials!
    * HTTP Module 
      * Learn [how to make HTTP requests with Node](https://github.com/nodejs/nodejs.dev/blob/aa4239e87a5adc992fdb709c20aebb5f6da77f86/content/learn/node-js-web-server/node-make-http-requests.en.md).
    * File System 
      * First, take a look at the [fs module](https://github.com/nodejs/nodejs.dev/blob/aa4239e87a5adc992fdb709c20aebb5f6da77f86/content/learn/node-js-modules/node-module-fs.en.md) that we use heavily for working with files in Node.
      * Then, let’s start [writing files](https://nodejs.org/en/learn/manipulating-files/writing-files-with-nodejs) in Node.
      * Finally, we’ll learn how to [read files](https://nodejs.org/en/learn/manipulating-files/reading-files-with-nodejs).
    * The URL Class 
      * Check out this [documentation](https://nodejs.org/api/url.html#url_the_whatwg_url_api) on the URL class. Play with the code samples to see how it works!
    * NPM 
      * Let’s get an [introduction](https://nodejs.org/en/learn/getting-started/an-introduction-to-the-npm-package-manager) to NPM.
      * After that, it’s time to quickly get introduced to the [package.json file](https://github.com/nodejs/nodejs.dev/blob/aa4239e87a5adc992fdb709c20aebb5f6da77f86/content/learn/node-js-package-manager/package-json.en.md).
      * And the differences between [NPM global and local packages](https://github.com/nodejs/nodejs.dev/blob/aa4239e87a5adc992fdb709c20aebb5f6da77f86/content/learn/node-js-package-manager/npm-packages-local-global.en.md).
    * Events 
      * Follow along the [Event Emitter](https://nodejs.org/en/learn/asynchronous-work/the-nodejs-event-emitter) section.
      * Look into [this](https://github.com/nodejs/nodejs.dev/blob/aa4239e87a5adc992fdb709c20aebb5f6da77f86/content/learn/node-js-modules/node-module-events.en.md) section to see the `events` module.
  * Optional Extra Credit! 
    * Although a bit outdated, the W3 Schools introduction to Node.js is super useful! Go to the [W3 Schools node tutorial](https://www.w3schools.com/nodejs/default.asp) and code along with the following lessons (which should be listed on the sidebar of their site). Specifically, work from the **Node.js Intro** through to **Node.js Events**. You can look at the **File Uploads** and **Email** sections if you’re feeling particularly ambitious!

The URL module is very outdated. Refer to the earlier link if you run into
issues in the Node.js URL Module from W3.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * [What is a File System Module? How and why would you use it?](https://github.com/nodejs/nodejs.dev/blob/aa4239e87a5adc992fdb709c20aebb5f6da77f86/content/learn/node-js-modules/node-module-fs.en.md)
  * [What is the command for installing a package locally in with npm?](https://github.com/nodejs/nodejs.dev/blob/aa4239e87a5adc992fdb709c20aebb5f6da77f86/content/learn/node-js-package-manager/npm-packages-local-global.en.md)
  * [What is the command for installing a package globally in with npm?](https://github.com/nodejs/nodejs.dev/blob/aa4239e87a5adc992fdb709c20aebb5f6da77f86/content/learn/node-js-package-manager/npm-packages-local-global.en.md)
  * [What is the difference between a global and local package install with npm?](https://github.com/nodejs/nodejs.dev/blob/aa4239e87a5adc992fdb709c20aebb5f6da77f86/content/learn/node-js-package-manager/npm-packages-local-global.en.md)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * This [crash course video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fBNz5xF-Kx4) from TraversyMedia is a great code-along for getting into Node.js. It may seem repetitive after completing the assignment, but practice is repetition!
  * This [crash course playlist of 12 episodes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zb3Qk8SG5Ms&list=PL4cUxeGkcC9jsz4LDYc6kv3ymONOKxwBU) from Net Ninja is a great resource to learn Node.js. There are 12 videos in this playlist, you can consider them all.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/nodeJS/introduction_to_nodeJS/getting_started.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnodejs-getting-
started&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Getting+Started%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/nodejs) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/nodejs-debugging-node)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

