Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

# About The Odin Project

The Odin Project is one of those "What I wish I had when I was learning"
resources. Not everyone has access to a computer science education or the
funds to attend an intensive coding school and neither of those is right for
everyone anyway. This project is designed to fill in the gap for people who
are trying to hack it on their own but still want a high quality education.

## What you can expect at The Odin Project

![](/assets/about_page/img-
education-e3565a58586975c5666f72075d0b3595ed3970a39837b20e2929a207ac6f3dcc.svg)

###  A full roadmap to becoming a developer

Our free, comprehensive curriculum will equip you to be a full stack
developer, no matter your current experience level.

![](/assets/about_page/img-build-
ff744742c689a4c6e5288a2b1254dd5f48b67612f077c6502d0d47da2f04c872.svg)

###  Learn by doing

The most effective learning happens while building projects, so we have
strategically placed them throughout our curriculum. These projects will make
a strong portfolio for you to showcase on your resume.

![](/assets/about_page/img-
people-38cb10d85ee4919c50abb7546115ed4f4bdf45494b5bee61f62f5a007d0f1752.svg)

###  Receive support from others

[The maintainers of the curriculum](/team) run a Discord community, with the
help of countless other volunteers, where you can receive help with anything
in our curriculum.

![](/assets/about_page/img-
opensource-c137c8616631027d6a10b1fe5aa932c5e594fc80caecd00d8b190a197f10f8f9.svg)

###  Open source and community driven

You can deepen your understanding and improve your GitHub skills by
contributing to our open source curriculum and helping others in our Discord
community.

## Overview of The Odin Project

1196440

Learners

5000+

Contributors

2013

Founded

### Origin of The Odin Project

The Odin Project provides a free open source coding curriculum that can be
taken entirely online. Since its inception, it has helped many students get
hired as developers and has assisted countless others in learning enough
programming to work on their own personal projects.

Erik Trautman founded The Odin Project in 2013. Currently it is maintained and
continually improved by a [team of volunteers](/team) many of whom learned to
code with us. Many find success from Odin Project's curriculum because of its
hands-on approach with learning and emphasis on building projects. The
curriculum is meticulously curated to ensure the content is up-to-date.

[__](https://www.github.com/theodinproject)

### Open Source

This website and the curriculum it hosts are completely open source. That
means anyone can work on new features or fix existing bugs on the website.
This also extends to the curriculum itself, anyone can work on new lessons,
add new resources and improve existing lessons.

The Odin Project would not be possible without the hard work of contributors
from all across the world. If you're interested in helping us make The Odin
Project better, please find out [how to contribute.](/contributing)

## Want to contact us?

Connect with our friendly community on discord, a chat and networking platform
or [send us an email](mailto:theodinprojectcontact@gmail.com).

[Chat on Discord](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

If you want to give back to our community, you can do so by contributing to
our open source projects, or by supporting us financially.

[Contribute](/contributing) [Donate](/support_us)

## Footer

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

