Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![NodeJS](/assets/badge-
nodejs-1432a58382afd13f5bf55d4e5eda07244a3aa5fae9cee98ea034f17d6a09d503.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

#  Introduction to MongoDB

[

##  NodeJS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

### Introduction

Data persistence is integral to the vast majority of web applications. Local
storage has limitations and poses security risks, and SaaS options such as
Firebase work well, but ultimately being able to understand how to structure,
build, and query your own database are important skills for any full stack
developer to have. For example, consider Twitter. Where are your username and
password stored? Or perhaps where all of your Tweets might be fetched from?
How does the application determine what Tweets are shown to you every time you
log on? These operations are handled by a database. Databases are split into
“relational” and “non-relational” types of databases, and each handles data
and scaling in different manners. [This
article](https://circleci.com/blog/SQL-vs-NoSQL-databases/) goes in depth with
the difference between the two. This lesson will teach you about MongoDB, a
popular NoSQL database.

### Learning outcomes

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to do the following:

  * Set up a database on MongoDB Atlas
  * Use the `mongo` shell
  * Create, edit, and delete documents in a MongoDB database using the `mongo` shell

### Assignment

  * Take the entire [MongoDB University “Introduction to MongoDB” course](https://learn.mongodb.com/learning-paths/introduction-to-mongodb). This course will teach you the basics of MongoDB and the mongo shell. You will need to make an account.

_Note_ : When you get to the lesson that asks you to install MongoDB Compass
you can skip the installation.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * [What is the difference between a relational database and a non-relational database?](https://circleci.com/blog/SQL-vs-NoSQL-databases/)

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/nodeJS/mongoDB/intro_to_mongoDB.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnodejs-introduction-to-
mongodb&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Introduction+to+MongoDB%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/nodejs) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/nodejs-introduction-to-express)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

