Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  Elements and Tags

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

HTML (HyperText Markup Language) defines the structure and content of
webpages. We use HTML elements to create all of the paragraphs, headings,
lists, images, and links that make up a typical webpage. In this lesson, we
will explore how HTML elements work.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * Explain what HTML Tags are
  * Explain what HTML elements are

### Elements and tags

Almost all elements on an HTML page are just pieces of content wrapped in
opening and closing HTML tags.

Opening tags tell the browser this is the start of an HTML element. They are
comprised of a keyword enclosed in angle brackets `<>`. For example, an
opening paragraph tag looks like this: `<p>`.

Closing tags tell the browser where an element ends. They are almost the same
as opening tags; the only difference is that they have a forward slash before
the keyword. For example, a closing paragraph tag looks like this: `</p>`.

A full paragraph element looks like this:

    
    
    <p>some text content</p>
    

Let’s break this down:

  * `<p>` is the opening tag.
  * `some text content` represents content wrapped within the opening and closing tags.
  * `</p>` is the closing tag.

You can think of elements as containers for content. The opening and closing
tags tell the browser what content the element contains. The browser can then
use that information to determine how it should interpret and format the
content.

There are some HTML elements that do not have a closing tag. These elements
often look like this: `<br />` or `<img/>`, but some can also be used without
the closing forward slash such as `<br>` or `<img>`. These are known as self-
closing tags or empty elements because they don’t wrap any content. We will
encounter a few of these in later lessons, but for the most part, elements
will have both opening and closing tags.

HTML has a [vast list of predefined tags](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-
US/docs/Web/HTML/Element) that you can use to create all kinds of different
elements. It is important to use the correct tags for content. Using the
correct tags can have a big impact on two aspects of your sites: how they are
ranked in search engines; and how accessible they are to users who rely on
assistive technologies, like screen readers, to use the internet.

Using the correct elements for content is called semantic HTML. We will
explore this in much more depth later on in the curriculum.

### Assignment

  1. [Watch Kevin Powell’s Introduction to HTML Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LGQuIIv2RVA&list=PL4-IK0AVhVjM0xE0K2uZRvsM7LkIhsPT-)

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * What is an HTML tag?
  * What are the three parts of an HTML element?

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [Don’t Fear the Internet’s video about HTML](http://www.dontfeartheinternet.com/02-html)

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/foundations/html_css/html-
foundations/elements-and-tags.md) [ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-elements-
and-
tags&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Elements+and+Tags%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-html-boilerplate)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

