Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  JavaScript Developer Tools

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

Knowing how to use the Developer Tools inside your browser is an important
skill for any web developer. The Developer Tools are useful for running
JavaScript code, editing HTML and CSS styles without having to refresh the
page, and viewing performance data. They also save you lots of time. Getting
started couldn’t be any easier. You should already be familiar with using them
for debugging and working on HTML and CSS, so let’s take a look at how they
can benefit us when writing JavaScript.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * Change screen size of a website with developer tools
  * View and change the DOM
  * Debug JavaScript
  * Use breakpoints
  * View and edit HTML in the Elements tab
  * View the Resources Panel to check the scripts running on a website
  * Add CSS Pseudostate to a Class
  * View CSS Properties in Alphabetical Order
  * View and edit the Box Model of any Element in Chrome DevTools
  * View a page in print mode
  * Enable or Disable CSS Classes
  * Simulate media queries in Device Mode

### Opening DevTools

There are three ways to open the Chrome DevTools menu:

  1. From the `Chrome Menu` > `More Tools` > `Developer Tools`
  2. Right-click anywhere on a webpage and select `Inspect`
  3. Use the keyboard shortcut `F12` or `Ctrl` \+ `Shift` \+ `C` (Mac: `Opt` \+ `Cmd` \+ `C`)

### Assignment

Google has updated some of the required sections in the below tutorials and
some elements have changed or no longer exist, but you can still follow along
using the same functionality and tools that they cover. For example, you may
be asked to inspect a button that is no longer on the page- you can still
follow along and inspect existing elements without issue.

  1. Head to the [Chrome DevTools Documentation](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/) by Google. The following subsections cover what you’ll be using the Developer Tools for 95% of the time. Feel free to skip the elements you are already familiar with, and only read these: 
    * CSS 
      1. [View and change CSS](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/css/)
      2. [CSS features reference](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/css/reference/)
    * [Get Started With Viewing And Changing The DOM](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/dom/)
    * Mobile Simulation 
      1. [Simulate mobile devices with Device Mode](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/device-mode/)
    * JavaScript 
      1. [Debug JavaScript](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/javascript/) \- Warning: In point 4 of step 3 of the tutorial, devtools will pause on the second line (`if (inputsAreEmpty()) {`) rather than at the declaration of the function. Don’t worry this is expected.
      2. [Pause your code with breakpoints](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/javascript/breakpoints/)
  2. Then, watch [the console overview video and read through the page](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/console/) to familiarize yourself with the console and its usage.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * How do you open developer tools?
  * [How do you change screen size of a website using developer tools?](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/device-mode/)
  * [What is a breakpoint?](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/javascript/breakpoints/)
  * [How do you set a breakpoint?](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/javascript/breakpoints/#loc)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * Learn 14 tips and tricks in this [JavaScript 30 Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xkzDaKwinA8) by Wes Bos

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/foundations/javascript_basics/javascript_developer_tools.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-javascript-
developer-
tools&template=suggestion.yaml&title=JavaScript+Developer+Tools%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-fundamentals-part-3)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

