Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![React](/assets/badge-
react-d347c579ca6df9afc0ef4127bb4fe6dc4002be06cb241f4d70b37c412f56cec2.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/react)

#  How This Course Will Work

[

##  React Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/react)

### Introduction

Hello there, welcome to The Odin Project’s React course. In this course, we’ll
learn about the basics of React and move on to more advanced concepts. We’ll
be building projects along the way that you can add to your portfolio to
impress recruiters with your React skills.

Make sure you’ve completed our [JavaScript
course](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/javascript) before starting this one. We can’t emphasize
enough how imperative it is to have a fair understanding of JavaScript before
diving into React. At the end of the day, React _is_ vanilla JavaScript, so
being able to navigate in JavaScript land is paramount to building a
successful React project.

### The journey ahead

All the lessons follow a similar structure that you’re accustomed to from your
prior courses. There’ll be lesson content followed by assignments. We’ve also
incorporated interactive examples via CodeSandbox to demonstrate the concepts
learned in those lessons.

As always, we’re going to preface this by saying that learning a new
technology can be a frustrating endeavor, but we’re confident you can
persevere. There might be times when you think to yourself, “Hey, I can do
this using vanilla JavaScript alright, why am I even learning React”, and
that’s fine. As you work through the lessons, you’ll soon realize how
convenient React can be in front-end development. Remember the dreaded [Todo
List project](https://www.theodinproject.com/lessons/node-path-javascript-
todo-list) from the JavaScript course? It’ll take you a few minutes in React
to get the core functionality down. That will surely get you excited. By the
end of the course, you’ll be a React Guru!

Now then,

### Let’s start Reactin’

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/react/introduction/how_this_course_will_work.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-react-new-how-
this-course-will-
work&template=suggestion.yaml&title=How+This+Course+Will+Work%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/react) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-react-new-
introduction-to-react)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

