Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Getting Hired](/assets/badge-getting-
hired-03b3463749a1cd7dd5358c585b0c35c2878bbde91aa0800f641992eeb69f7c66.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-hired)

#  Professional Networking

[

##  Getting Hired Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-
hired)

### Introduction

A robust professional network is an irreplaceable asset on your journey to
becoming a web developer, and beyond. As social beings we are wired to connect
with others, receive help, and give help. This is no different in the software
ecosystem where countless communities take part in the mutually beneficial
transactions of networking.

One significant benefit of your network is that it might help you land your
first job in software. This is not a guarantee, but it is the lived experience
of many developers. As with all things, you get back what you put in, so the
more developed your network is, the better your odds it will provide a benefit
for you. Making genuine connections with people takes time, however, so we
recommend you start investing time and effort sooner than later.

### Lesson overview

This lesson covers the following topics:

  * What a professional network is
  * How a professional network might benefit you
  * Strategies and actions to consider when building and maintaining your professional network

### What is a professional network?

Your professional network is not the people you follow on social media, nor is
it necessarily your friends. It is the people with whom you have made a
genuine connection, whether in-person or online, because you have a mutual
interest and can gain more value through being connected than you would
otherwise have alone. These are the people you can ask for help, and in turn
you can help out later.

The network that will help you on your journey to becoming a software
developer will mostly consist of people working in software development and
adjacent roles, like recruitment or management. Take stock of your network in
this field now. Chances are, you might benefit from expanding it.

### Why is a professional network useful?

You can probably think of instances where you were stuck on a task and asked
someone for help. This is an example of exercising your network. You can do
the same with your software developer network to help you gather information,
make decisions, and find a job.

When it comes to information gathering, search engines and AI can be very
helpful. But when more nuance is needed, it can be easier to ask a real human.
For example:

  * You might want to conduct an informational interview with a senior developer to learn about what they do and how they broke into the industry.
  * You might be seeking feedback on your portfolio.
  * You may be looking to get some career progression advice.

Interacting with someone who has experience in what you seek can be beneficial
because you can form a dialogue, ask follow-up questions, and get real-time
feedback.

Your network can also help you make decisions. Have you ever had decision
paralysis? This is when you are presented with so many options, you cannot
choose. This happens a lot in tech, especially for newcomers, given the sheer
number of languages, frameworks and tools to choose from. Sometimes it’s
easier to canvas the people you trust and take their recommendations. By doing
this we are gathering “social proof”. If someone we know recommends something,
we are more likely to choose it (it’s also why you read reviews before buying
stuff online!).

When it comes to finding a job, your network can be the most valuable asset
you have. Depending on the source, up to [80% of all jobs are not posted
online](https://www.forbes.com/sites/dianatsai/2017/10/02/80-of-jobs-are-not-
on-job-boards-heres-how-to-find-them/?sh=29ada3fcd455). This means you are
only seeing about 20% of all open jobs when you are browsing job boards, and
the rest are in the ‘hidden jobs market’. Now, these percentages may vary, but
it’s a safe bet that the hidden jobs market is real, and likely significant.
If your strategy does not attempt to tap into this market, you are undermining
your chances of success and will be stuck competing with many applicants for
fewer jobs.

Think of it from the company’s perspective. Hiring is a pain. In a perfect
world, a great candidate would show up instantly any time a new job opened up.
This would save them going through the process of posting the job, screening
applicants, marking technical assessments and conducting interviews. This all
takes time and is very expensive. So it stands to reason why most companies
would prefer to hire through the hidden jobs market.

So, how do you tap into the hidden jobs market? Through your network. If your
network sees you as a trusted individual with a particular skill set, you can
be sure they will think of you when matching opportunities arise. You might
ask around about potential jobs and receive a heads up of a new opportunity at
someone’s company. Better still, you could be recommended for a particular
role. Many companies even give bonuses to staff who refer a candidate that
gets hired, so the incentive to network and pass names along goes both ways.

This is not to say you should refrain entirely from applying to posted jobs.
These are definitely still worthwhile to pursue, but it’s still better to
choose quality over quantity by seeking companies that you find interesting
and have core values you identify with. You will be better off sending fewer,
tailored applications over hundreds of the same application in a shotgun-like
approach. We cover more on this in the Getting Hired course.

### How to build a professional network

Just like building your technical skills, networking requires careful
attention and a strategic approach. A local network allows you to build
strong, in-person connections while a virtual network allows you to connect
with people all over the world. Both are useful and a strategy that focuses on
the two will be the most robust.

#### Start Now

Your network will take time to build. The sooner you start to make
connections, the better. Starting now means you will have more of a network to
leverage when you need to rely on it. Consider proactively allocating a
percentage of your web development study time to this activity. This can act
as a nice breather between the mental workout of coding, and you may even
combine networking and learning during activities like attending local meetups
and conferences.

#### Identify Your Options

Your time is limited and your options are endless. So, you should understand
what options you have at your disposal and select one or two to start with.

In-person networking opportunities will vary based on your location. Larger
towns and cities will likely have well-established tech-related events and
groups, whereas smaller communities may be more limited. To get a better sense
of what’s going on around you, consider the following:

  * Check [Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/), [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/), and/or Google for local communities focused on a given technology.
  * Scour local business publications for notices on local conferences and tech events.
  * Talk to friends and family to see who might be a software developer you could be introduced to.
  * Follow local tech companies on social media to learn about their in-person events.
  * Sign up for newsletters focused on content in your local tech scene.
  * Start your own Meetup group focused on a particular topic, e.g. Ruby or JavaScript.

Your virtual networking options are much broader and there’s no shortage of
platforms and communities to choose from. Consider the following to help you
decide on where and how to focus your efforts:

  * [Join the Odin community](https://www.theodinproject.com/lessons/foundations-join-the-odin-community).
  * [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/) \- your profile acts like your virtual resume and first impressions are important. Put some time into [optimizing your profile](https://www.samanthaming.com/blog/tips-to-optimize-your-linkedin-profile-for-developers/). Then start following companies you would like to work at or find interesting, and individuals you can learn from. Engage with their content with questions and comments and consider creating your own content about your developer journey. Connect with people who engage with you and aim to make these connections genuine by looking at someone’s profile and finding something in common to talk about.
  * [X](https://x.com/) \- this is a great platform to keep a finger on the pulse of a given domain. You can follow companies and individuals, engage with their posts, and create your own content.
  * [Discord](https://discord.com/) \- there’s likely a discord channel dedicated to a given language or framework where you can ask questions and get help. You can sign up for Discord and search for what you are interested in e.g., NodeJS, Ruby on Rails, and request to join.
  * Open Source projects - when you have the skillset and confidence to contribute to open-source projects, you will be working directly with project maintainers and contributors. It is a great way to connect with other developers while working towards a common good.

A great way to find out reliable information, quickly, is through
[informational interviews](https://blog.get-merit.com/break-into-tech-with-
informational-interviewing/). An informational interview is the formal name
for a chat with someone who is in a position you want to be in, or are
interested in learning about. You get to ask them questions, such as “What
path did you take to get to this point?”, “What do you do in a typical work
day?”, “What advice would you give to someone like me?”, and “Tell me about
the challenges you face in your role”. The questions you ask should help you
find out if a particular role or company is the right fit for you and if you
need to make any adjustments in your strategy. It is also a solid way to
connect with the person you are “interviewing” and it would be wise to add
them to your network thereafter (e.g., LinkedIn).

### Build Genuine Connections

The economy of professional networking rewards authenticity and mutual
respect. If you are going to ask a favor of someone, you are far more likely
to get help if you have developed a genuine connection. That is to say, please
do not approach people “cold” and ask them out of the blue to connect with
you, or for a favor like “help me get this job in your company” or, “please be
my mentor”. This may be perceived as disrespectful. People are busy, and they
reserve their limited time for helping those they know and respect.

Your best strategy is to start conversations with a genuine interest in the
person and connect on a mutual interest. For example, you could review
someone’s profile on LinkedIn and find something in common, or begin a
conversation in-person with questions related to what the person does, how
they got to where they are, and what challenges they face in their daily work.
Make it about them, not you. Show that you are interested in them as a person,
not that you want them to give you something. Actively listen to what they say
and ask follow-up questions and even offer to help with something if you are
in a position to do so. Think of the interaction like dating: you don’t ask
someone to be your romantic partner in your first conversation, right? The
same applies here. If your initial conversation goes well, then you can follow
up with a request to connect.

If you find it hard to talk to strangers in person and you are on your way to
a local meetup or conference, consider having some predetermined things to
talk about. Come up with a few generic questions such as “Where do you work?”,
“What tech stack do you use at work?”, “How did you get into coding?”. Also,
don’t forget to prepare to talk about yourself. Think of a 30-second elevator
pitch describing who you are, what you do, and where you want to be in 12
months. This will help put your mind at ease because you will have something
to say when your brain doesn’t feel like thinking in the moment.

If you’re still not sure how to get started virtually, find one or two people
who seem to be doing a good job at connecting with others and study their
behavior. How often do they post or comment on other posts? What sort of
language do they use? How do they treat others that interact with them?
Chances are, if you adapt some of these behaviors to become your own you will
also have more success connecting with others.

### Maintain Your Network

Your professional network is a dynamic and organic entity. Much like a garden,
it will take some maintenance and attention to keep it in shape. You can do
this by asking and answering questions in online communities, sending messages
to your connections, and attending in-person events or scheduling periodic
coffee-chats with your closest connections. Ideally, this does not feel like a
chore. Rather, it’s something you naturally do because you enjoy it and get
value from the interactions.

There is so much more to building a professional network, but this lesson
should give you a good start. Remember, it will take time, so start early and
be genuine. Good luck!

### Additional Resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [How to use LinkedIn as a developer to get a job in tech](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SG5Sb5WTV_g)
  * [How to Network: a Guide for Remote Software Developers & Engineers](https://arc.dev/developer-blog/how-to-network-as-remote-developer/)
  * [First ruby friend](https://firstrubyfriend.org): people on the ruby path can find free mentorship from friendly volunteers here.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/getting_hired/preparing_for_job_search/professional_networking.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-getting-hired-
professional-
networking&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Professional+Networking%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/getting-hired) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-getting-hired-
strategy)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

