Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![NodeJS](/assets/badge-
nodejs-1432a58382afd13f5bf55d4e5eda07244a3aa5fae9cee98ea034f17d6a09d503.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

#  Introduction to the Back End

[

##  NodeJS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

### Introduction

The “frontend” denotes the interface that a web user interacts with - what
they see (and hear) when using the web. The three languages of the frontend
are fairly standardized: HTML for markup, CSS for presentation, and JavaScript
for scripting.

The “backend”, meanwhile, denotes all that goes on “behind the scenes” on web
servers to make the user experience possible. In contrast to front-end
development, you can run pretty much any language you want to on your server
since it doesn’t rely on your user’s browser understanding what’s going on.
All the browser cares about is whether you’ve sent it properly formatted HTML,
CSS and JavaScript files (and other assets like images). That’s led to a whole
lot of different choices for back-end languages. As long as it can take in an
HTTP request and spit out some HTML, you can probably put it on a server
somehow.

That said, some languages are more popular and practical than others. If
you’re running your own server, you have a ton of flexibility but plenty of
headaches. If you’re using the cloud (which we will be doing later), you may
be restricted to those languages that your cloud provider has installed on
their platform… It doesn’t do you much good if the servers you’re “borrowing”
from can’t understand your code!

Some of the most popular server-side languages are PHP, C#, Ruby, Python and
Java (not to be confused with JavaScript). Just as we can say “Which way to
the nearest pub?” in Swedish, French, Italian, English, and Bad English, so
too can all of those languages perform almost exactly the same functions, just
using different syntax.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * What is the difference between front-end and back-end development?

### Assignment

  1. Check out [this blog post on backend vs frontend programming](http://blog.teamtreehouse.com/i-dont-speak-your-language-frontend-vs-backend) for a quick refresher on the difference between the two.
  2. [A good and short overview of the backend](https://techterms.com/definition/backend).
  3. [A much more detailed and thorough explanation](https://www.codecademy.com/articles/back-end-architecture) of the various aspects of the backend is provided by Codecademy, including a step-by-step breakdown of what happens in the backend when a browser makes a request to a server.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * [What is back-end development?](https://techterms.com/definition/backend)
  * [How many parts does the backend consist of?](https://www.codecademy.com/articles/back-end-architecture/)
  * [Name each part of the backend.](https://www.codecademy.com/articles/back-end-architecture)
  * [Where does the backend store its data?](https://www.codecademy.com/articles/back-end-architecture)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * It looks like this lesson doesn’t have any additional resources yet. Help us expand this section by contributing to our curriculum.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/shared/the_back_end/introduction_to_the_backend_lesson.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnodejs-introduction-to-
the-back-
end&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Introduction+to+the+Back+End%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/nodejs) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/nodejs-introduction-to-
frameworks)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

