Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Advanced HTML and CSS](/assets/badge-html-
css-91bc8d9c7ebb2e2f73eeb302c38a92d9ba6f182301dbd1868d7198fcc8376aeb.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/advanced-html-and-css)

#  Accessible Colors

[

##  Advanced HTML and CSS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/advanced-
html-and-css)

### Introduction

Although adding color to a page can make it more visually appealing, using the
wrong color combination or relying solely on color to convey information can
end up making things more difficult to perceive and understand for some users.
This doesn’t mean you have to limit yourself when choosing color schemes for a
website, but it does mean you have to take extra care when actually _using_
those colors.

### Learning outcomes

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to:

  * Understand what a contrast ratio is.
  * Know how to check contrast ratios.
  * Understand why color alone should not be used to convey information.

### Color contrast

[![Contrast ratio issues](https://user-
images.githubusercontent.com/70952936/125673709-dd42bdf0-a4bc-4103-9a1b-e73e6c3bc85b.jpg)](https://user-
images.githubusercontent.com/70952936/125673709-dd42bdf0-a4bc-4103-9a1b-e73e6c3bc85b.jpg)

Can you easily read the text in all three (yes, three) examples from the image
above? If you can’t, then that’s because the contrast ratio is too low. If you
can, then consider me jealous of your eye sight, but you still need to provide
an easily perceivable website for visually impaired users.

A contrast ratio is the difference in brightness between two colors expressed
as a ratio. White text on a white background would have lowest ratio (1:1),
while black text on a white background would have the highest (21:1). Contrast
ratios refer to both normal text as well as images of text.

There are two different conformance levels for contrast ratios, both of which
have rules for normal text and large text. **Normal text** is defined as text
with a font size that’s less than 18 points/24px (or less than 14
points/18.66px for bold text), and **large text** is defined as text with a
font size that is at least 18 points/24px (or at least 14 points/18.66px for
bold text).

  1. **Level AA** (minimum) requires a contrast ratio of at least 4.5:1 for normal text and 3:1 for large text.
  2. **Level AAA** (enhanced) requires a contrast ratio of at least 7:1 for normal text and 4.5:1 for large text.

Both conformance levels have exceptions that don’t need to follow the contrast
ratio rules:

  * Incidental text, such as text that just _happens_ to be within an image that has other significant visual content, or text that is purely decorative.
  * Text that is part of an inactive or disabled user interface component, such as a button that is disabled and has a lowered opacity.
  * Text that is part of a logo or brand name.

At this point you might be thinking, “18.66 pixels? 4.5:1? How the heck am I
supposed to remember these numbers? Wait, how am I supposed to calculate the
ratios in the first place?!” Luckily for you, you don’t have to!

[WebAIM Contrast Checker](https://webaim.org/resources/contrastchecker/) is a
fantastic tool for checking contrast ratios. Just enter the HEX code of the
foreground and background colors and it calculates what conformance levels, if
any, the contrast ratio passes. The page also has a link for a link contrast
checker, which goes over what the contrast ratio should be if a text link
isn’t underlined.

You can also check the contrast ratio of the text within an element using your
browser’s dev tools. In **Chrome** , you would click the “element picker” tool
in the Elements tab, then hover over an element on the web page. If you select
an element with text in the Elements tab, you can click on the color picker
tool for the “color” property under Styles to view the contrast ratio as well.

### Conveying information

Now that you know to take the contrast ratio into account when adding color
for text and backgrounds, let’s see if you can tell which of the buttons in
the image below is red:

[![Color blindness simulation](https://user-
images.githubusercontent.com/70952936/125673910-66b43803-3228-4920-98f8-80ac063ef344.jpg)](https://user-
images.githubusercontent.com/70952936/125673910-66b43803-3228-4920-98f8-80ac063ef344.jpg)

The answer, by the way, is button 4. The image above is simulating
achromatopsia, which is also known as total color blindness. This illustrates
a key point when using color: **you shouldn’t use color alone to convey
information**. There may be exceptions where it’s necessary to only use color,
but generally you want to follow this rule.

Let’s look at another example. Let’s say you want to create a form that has an
instruction stating that required fields are indicated by red text. If a user
is color blind or otherwise has difficulty telling some colors apart, having
to rely solely on the color of this text can make it difficult or even
impossible to perceive or operate the form. Instead of only using color, your
form could indicate all required fields with red text and an asterisk:

[![Conveying information with color](https://user-
images.githubusercontent.com/70952936/125674026-9baafc58-2339-48f4-8b12-892375b87ad7.jpg)](https://user-
images.githubusercontent.com/70952936/125674026-9baafc58-2339-48f4-8b12-892375b87ad7.jpg)

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * What is a contrast ratio?
  * What are two ways you can check a contrast ratio using your dev tools?
  * What should you avoid when conveying information to users?

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [A Complete Guide to Dark Mode on the Web](https://css-tricks.com/a-complete-guide-to-dark-mode-on-the-web) from CSS-Tricks can be a great starting point for implementing a dark theme for your website. It covers different ways you can toggle a theme, how to take into account a user’s preferred theme on their OS, and even saving a user’s preference. Although providing a light and dark theme can be a great accessibility feature for users (not just an aesthetic preference), it can take a _lot_ of work to implement, hence why it is considered an additional resource.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/advanced_html_css/accessibility/accessible_colors.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-advanced-html-
and-css-accessible-
colors&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Accessible+Colors%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/advanced-html-and-css) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/node-path-advanced-html-and-css-keyboard-navigation)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

