Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Intermediate HTML and CSS](/assets/badge-html-
css-91bc8d9c7ebb2e2f73eeb302c38a92d9ba6f182301dbd1868d7198fcc8376aeb.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/intermediate-html-and-css)

#  More Text Styles

[

##  Intermediate HTML and CSS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/intermediate-html-and-css)

### Introduction

You’ve already done a bit of text-manipulation in our Foundations lessons.
This lesson will cover a few more useful CSS properties that can be used when
working with text.

### Learning outcomes

  * You’ll learn how to use custom fonts on your web projects.
  * You’ll learn some more text-related CSS properties.

### Fonts

In our Foundations lesson, we covered changing the `font-family` of an
element, but there is some nuance and detail that we left out at the time.

#### The system font stack

If you use the `font-family` property to change to a font like `impact` or
`Times New Roman`, and those fonts do not happen to be installed on your
user’s computer, then a fallback font will be displayed. If you have not
defined a fallback, then the default HTML font will be used, which is often
somewhat ugly. For this reason, it’s common to see somewhat long stacks of
fonts listed on projects.

One popular stack is this ‘system font’ stack. [Source: CSS
Tricks](https://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/system-font-stack/)

    
    
    body {
      font-family: system-ui, "Segoe UI", Roboto, Helvetica, Arial, sans-serif, "Apple Color Emoji", "Segoe UI Emoji", "Segoe UI Symbol";
    }
    

The point of this somewhat ridiculous string of font-families is to try using
the default font of the system’s user interface. It will go through each of
those fonts until it finds one that is installed on the system, and then use
that. Using a stack like this often produces pleasing results, especially if
you’re going for a somewhat ‘neutral’ font style.

#### Online font libraries

One popular and easy method to get fonts that are _not_ installed on a user’s
computer is to use an online font library like [Google
Fonts](https://fonts.google.com/), [Font Library](https://fontlibrary.org/) or
the premium, but non-free [Adobe Fonts](https://fonts.adobe.com/).

To use a font from one of these libraries, go to the website, select a font
and then copy a snippet from the website to import that font from their server
into your website. You’ll be given either a `<link>` tag to put in your HTML
like so….

    
    
    <link rel="preconnect" href="https://fonts.googleapis.com">
    <link rel="preconnect" href="https://fonts.gstatic.com" crossorigin>
    <link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css2?family=Roboto&display=swap" rel="stylesheet">
    

… or an `@import` tag that can be dropped at the top of a CSS file.

    
    
    @import url('https://fonts.googleapis.com/css2?family=Roboto&display=swap');
    

Either method will import that font and make it available for you to use in
your CSS:

    
    
    body {
      font-family: 'Roboto', sans-serif;
    }
    

Keep in mind that it’s important to add a fallback font. If you’re linking to
an external API, you have no guarantee that the URL won’t change, or that the
external API won’t go down at some point. Having a reasonable fallback means
that if something goes wrong, at least your site won’t look completely broken.

#### Downloaded fonts

It is also possible to use a font that you have downloaded from the web. In
your CSS file, you import and define a custom font using the `@font-face`
rule, and then use it as you would any other font-family. There are multiple
types of font file formats and you can read more in depth about them on
[fileinfo.com’s page on Font File
Formats](https://fileinfo.com/filetypes/font). Please take care when choosing
a font file format however, because some are not universally supported by
browsers. A list of browsers and the font formats they support can be found on
[W3 Schools’ page on CSS Web
Fonts](https://www.w3schools.com/css/css3_fonts.asp).

    
    
    @font-face {
      font-family: my-cool-font;
      src: url(../fonts/the-font-file.woff);
    }
    
    h1 {
      font-family: my-cool-font, sans-serif;
    }
    

This method _may_ be more reliable than relying on a third-party font API, but
it is always wise to include a fallback.

### Text styles

You learned the basics of manipulating fonts in our Foundations lessons, but
there is quite a bit more that you can do with CSS when it comes to
manipulating text styles. These rules are all relatively simple and self-
explanatory. You can refer to the docs for any questions you might have.

#### font-style

Typically used to make a font italic. You learned about the HTML `<em>` tag,
which uses an italic font, but `<em>` _also_ signifies that the text it wraps
is significant or should be emphasized in some way. A good rule of thumb to
follow is that if you just want text to be italic (or bold, underlined,
highlighted, etc.), use a CSS property. Otherwise, if text should have some
sort of semantic emphasis, use the correct HTML element.

For example, if you want all your header text to be italic you should use
`font-style` to accomplish this. If you want some text in the _middle of a
sentence_ to appear italic in order to emphasize that text, it is appropriate
to use an `em` element. The [MDN doc on the Emphasis
Element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/em) puts
stress on our point above.

We should use `font-style: italic;` if italics is required for styling
purposes.

    
    
    h1 {
      font-style: italic;
    }
    

We should use the `em` element if italics is required for emphasis.

    
    
    <p>I <em>never</em> said he stole your money</p>
    <p>I never said <em>he</em> stole your money</p>
    <p>I never said he stole <em>your</em> money</p>
    

#### letter-spacing

Letter spacing does what you would expect…. it changes the space between
letters in a word. This can be useful for adjusting custom fonts that you feel
have too much or too little space. It can also be aesthetically pleasing in
some cases, like headers.

See the Pen [ Letter Spacing | CSS Text
Styles](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/MWomjGr) by
TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

Obviously, use this sparingly and with care. Do not make your site hard to
read!

#### line-height

Line height adjusts the space between lines in wrapped text. Adding a little
line-height can increase readability.

See the Pen [ Line Height | CSS Text
Styles](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/vYZmXzY) by
TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

#### text-transform

Text transform simply changes the case of the given text. You can use this,
for example, to force your heading tags to be all uppercase, or to capitalize
every word.

Usage is simple, and can be seen in the clear example on these [MDN web
docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/text-transform).

#### text-shadow

As you might expect, `text-shadow` adds a shadow around the text in the
selected element. This one is best used sparingly, but can be used to great
effect in headings or other presentational text.

The examples on the [MDN reference page for text-
shadow](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/text-shadow) show how
to use it.

#### ellipsis

This one isn’t a single property, but it’s a useful trick to keep in your
toolbox. With the `text-overflow` property, you can truncate overflowing text
with an ellipsis. Making an overflow happen, however, requires the use of a
couple other properties because the default behavior of text simply printing
outside its container isn’t technically considered an `overflow` (that’s
confusing, we know. Sorry.)

The full snippet is:

    
    
    .overflowing {
      white-space: nowrap;
      overflow: hidden;
      text-overflow: ellipsis;
    }
    

You can see more detail and an example in [this CSS Tricks
Article](https://css-tricks.com/snippets/css/truncate-string-with-ellipsis/).
(Be ready to go look that article up every time you want to use this.)

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * What are the 2 ways to add fonts that are not installed on a user’s computer?
  * What is the ‘system font stack’ and why would you want to use it?
  * Which property would you use to increase or decrease the space between letters in a word?
  * Which property would you use to increase or decrease the space between lines in a paragraph?

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental for if you need to dive deeper into something.

  * [Modern CSS Techniques To Improve Legibility](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2020/07/css-techniques-legibility/) by [Edoardo Cavazza](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/author/edoardo-cavazza/) is a great article that covers some additional text styles and techniques that can be utilized to improve websites legibility.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/intermediate_html_css/intermediate_css_concepts/more_text_styles.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-intermediate-
html-and-css-more-text-
styles&template=suggestion.yaml&title=More+Text+Styles%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/intermediate-html-and-css) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/node-path-intermediate-html-and-css-more-css-properties)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

