Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  Fundamentals Part 3

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

Things are about to get _really_ exciting. So far you have been writing an
impressive amount of code to solve various problems, but that code has not
been as useful as it could be. Imagine taking one of your scripts and bundling
it into a little package that you could use over and over again without having
to rewrite or change the code. That’s the power of functions, and they’re used
_constantly_ in JavaScript.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * How to define and invoke different kinds of functions.
  * How to use the return value.
  * What function scope is.

### Functions

  1. [This lengthy MDN article](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Building_blocks/Functions) is a good place to start. Don’t worry as there may be some functions that can be beyond the reach of this particular lesson, but do pay special attention to the sections on ‘Function Scope’. Scope is a topic that commonly trips up both beginner and intermediate coders, so it pays to spend some time with it upfront. Note that this article also has its own exercises attached, which you should **not** do, as they involve knowledge we haven’t touched yet.
  2. Read this article about [return values](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Building_blocks/Return_values).
  3. Let’s discuss parameters and arguments in the context of the following example function:
    
         function favoriteAnimal(animal) {
       return animal + " is my favorite animal!"
     }
    
     console.log(favoriteAnimal('Goat'))
    

In JavaScript, parameters are the items listed between the parentheses in the
function declaration. Function arguments are the actual values we decide to
pass to the function. In the example above, the function definition is written
on the first line: `function favoriteAnimal(animal)`. The parameter, `animal`,
is found inside the parentheses. We could just as easily replace `animal` with
`pet`, `x`, or `blah`. But in this case, naming the parameter `animal` gives
someone reading our code a bit of context so that they don’t have to guess
what `animal` may eventually contain. By putting `animal` inside the
parentheses of the `favoriteAnimal()` function, we are telling JavaScript that
we will send _some_ value to our `favoriteAnimal` function. This means that
`animal` is just a **placeholder** for some future value. But what value are
we sending? The last line, `favoriteAnimal('Goat')`, is where we are calling
our `favoriteAnimal` function and passing the value `'Goat'` inside that
function. Here, `'Goat'` is our argument. We are telling the `favoriteAnimal`
function, “Please send `'Goat'` to the favoriteAnimal function and use
`'Goat'` wherever the ‘animal’ placeholder is.” Because of the flexibility
that using a parameter provides, we can declare any animal to be our favorite.

Make note of the fact that by calling `favoriteAnimal()` inside of
`console.log()` with the argument `'Goat'` we get the return value of the
function, string of `"Goat is my favorite animal!"`, printed to the console.
We’re passing in a function call `favoriteAnimal('Goat')` as an argument in a
different function call - `log()`. Keep this possibility in mind because
you’ll be passing in function calls as arguments somewhat often. If we just
called the function without console.logging what it returns, nothing would
appear in the console **but** nonetheless the function would return that
string.

Feel free to experiment with the code on your own and replace `'Goat'` with
your favorite animal. Notice how we can change the argument to anything we
like? Try changing `animal` in the function declaration and in the function
body, too. What happens when you do?

  4. Next, read [this article](http://javascript.info/function-basics) from Javascript.info. We’ve mentioned this before, but JavaScript has changed a bit over the years and functions have recently received some innovation. This article covers one of the more useful new abilities: ‘default parameters’. (NOTE: The last “task” at the end of this lesson uses loops, which you will learn about in the next lesson. Don’t worry about that one.)
  5. Now, read [this article](http://javascript.info/function-expressions) about functions in JavaScript to give you a little more context, and read [this article](http://javascript.info/arrow-functions-basics) for an introduction to a relatively new feature in modern JavaScript called the `arrow function`. Arrow functions are useful but not crucial, so don’t worry about them too much just yet. We include them here because you are likely to encounter them as you move forward, and it’s better that you have at least _some_ idea of what you’re looking at whenever they crop up.
  6. Finally, read [this article](https://www.javascripttutorial.net/javascript-call-stack/) about call stacks and how `return` works in the context of chained function calls. Don’t worry if you don’t fully understand this yet, but it’s important to keep in mind where your `return`ed values are going. This doubles as a bit of early computer science as well.

### Assignment

Let’s write some functions! Write these in the `script` tag of a skeleton HTML
file. If you’ve forgotten how to set it up, review the instructions from
[Fundamentals Part 1](https://www.theodinproject.com/lessons/foundations-
fundamentals-part-1#how-to-run-javascript-code).

For now, just write each function and test the output with `console.log`.

  1. Write a function called `add7` that takes one number and returns that number + 7.
  2. Write a function called `multiply` that takes 2 numbers and returns their product.
  3. Write a function called `capitalize` that takes a string and returns that string with _only_ the first letter capitalized. Make sure that it can take strings that are lowercase, UPPERCASE or BoTh.
  4. Write a function called `lastLetter` that takes a string and returns the very last letter of that string: 
    * `lastLetter("abcd")` should return `"d"`

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * [What are functions useful for?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Building_blocks/Functions)
  * [How do you invoke a function?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Building_blocks/Functions#invoking_functions)
  * [What are anonymous functions?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Building_blocks/Functions#anonymous_functions_and_arrow_functions)
  * [What is function scope?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Building_blocks/Functions#function_scope_and_conflicts)
  * [What are return values?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Building_blocks/Return_values)
  * [What are arrow functions?](https://javascript.info/arrow-functions-basics)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [What’s the difference between using “let” and “var”? - stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/762011/whats-the-difference-between-using-let-and-var#:~:text=The%20main%20difference%20is%20scoping,\(hence%20the%20block%20scope\))
  * [How JavaScript Code is executed?](https://youtu.be/iLWTnMzWtj4)

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/foundations/javascript_basics/fundamentals-3.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-
fundamentals-
part-3&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Fundamentals+Part+3%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-problem-solving)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

