Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Databases](/assets/badge-database-
feffd1ceb24267152793e33ea95e98ffeb3d203fd62d77302ac165dcfc421349.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-rails/courses/databases)

#  Databases

[

##  Databases Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-
rails/courses/databases)

### Introduction

We’ve talked about the client-side and the server-side but how do we keep
ahold of all our user’s data? Who remembers that your login password is
`CatLover1985` so you can sign into the website? The bottom layer of any web
application is the database and it handles all the remembering for you (we’ll
cover caching much later). It can be relatively simple, like an Excel
spreadsheet, or incredibly complex and split into many giant pieces, like
Facebook’s.

Databases are kind of hidden in the back of the web application, so people
approach them with a sense of suspicion and awe. However, do not fret or feel
intimidated. As you dive deeper into the subject, your databases and you are
going to become very good friends (or at least frenemies). Rest assured, by
the end of this curriculum, you’re going to understand what’s going on with
your databases and be able to interact with them like a pro (and probably
better than some people you’ll work with). This lesson is a teaser for that.

Compared to a normal programming language like you’ve already learned, SQL
(Structured Query Language), which is used to query databases, has a very
simple syntax… with only a small handful of verbs to learn. What trips people
up is that you need to be able to visualize in your head what it’s going to be
doing. We’ll spend a fair bit of time on SQL and databases because they’re so
fundamental, but for now we’ll just cover enough to get you familiar with
what’s going on in there.

### Learning overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * What a database is.
  * What relational databases are.
  * In what way relational databases are different from XML.
  * What SQL is.
  * What SQL is used for.
  * How to get all the records from a table in SQL.
  * How to insert a record in SQL.

### Assignment

  1. Check out this [introduction](https://launchschool.com/books/sql/read/introduction) of how SQL can be used to organise and manage an overwhelming amount of data. 
    * You do not need to go any further than the first page on introductions.
  2. Watch this [short video introduction to relational databases](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z2kbsG8zsLM) to get a feel for why this stuff is useful and some more exposure to the terminology we’ll use.
  3. Go through this [Khan Academy tutorial](https://www.khanacademy.org/computing/hour-of-code/hour-of-sql/v/welcome-to-sql), to get a feel for actually creating and manipulating databases.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * [What is a database?](https://launchschool.com/books/sql/read/introduction#structureddata)
  * [What are relational databases?](https://launchschool.com/books/sql/read/introduction#rdbms)
  * [What is a Primary Key?](https://youtu.be/z2kbsG8zsLM?t=200)
  * [What is SQL?](https://launchschool.com/books/sql/read/introduction#sql)
  * [How do you get all the records from a table in SQL?](https://www.khanacademy.org/computing/hour-of-code/hour-of-code-lessons/hour-of-sql/pt/querying-the-table)
  * [How do you insert a record in SQL?](https://www.khanacademy.org/computing/hour-of-code/hour-of-code-lessons/hour-of-sql/pt/creating-a-table-and-inserting-data)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [What is a Relational Database?](http://computer.howstuffworks.com/question599.htm) from HowStuffWorks.com
  * A brief [Simple Wiki article describing relational databases](http://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relational_database)
  * Hunter Ducharme created [an e-book](https://hunter-ducharme.gitbook.io/sql-basics/) which is a great documentation on how to do all the basics in SQL.
  * David J. Malan’s excellent SQL lecture and resources in [Harvard’s CS50x](https://cs50.harvard.edu/x/2023/weeks/7/).
  * Relational databases aren’t the only way to store data. Non-relational (aka NoSQL) databases have emerged over the last couple decades. Check out [this article](https://circleci.com/blog/SQL-vs-NoSQL-databases/) to learn the difference between SQL and NoSQL.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/databases/databases/databases.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fdatabases&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Databases%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-
rails/courses/databases) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo
to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/databases-databases-and-sql)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

