Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  Computer Basics

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

Needless to say, while learning to code, you’ll be spending most of your time
on a computer. Hence, understanding how to work with your computer is crucial.
In this lesson, we’ll introduce a resource which will quickly get you up to
speed with some computer basics.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * Computer software and hardware.
  * How to take screenshots.
  * The importance of strong passwords.

### Assignment

Goodwill Community Foundation (GCF) resources are excellent to get you
acquainted with the basics. They have accompanying videos and illustrations
and are easy to read. The following readings should be sufficient, although
you are welcome to explore more of GCF’s resources.

  1. [What is a computer?](https://edu.gcfglobal.org/en/computerbasics/what-is-a-computer/1/)
  2. [What is an operating system?](https://edu.gcfglobal.org/en/computerbasics/understanding-operating-systems/1/)
  3. [What is an application?](https://edu.gcfglobal.org/en/computerbasics/understanding-applications/1/)
  4. [Open source vs closed source software.](https://edu.gcfglobal.org/en/basic-computer-skills/open-source-vs-closed-source-software/1/)
  5. [Taking screenshots](https://edu.gcfglobal.org/en/techsavvy/taking-screenshots/1/).
  6. [Creating strong passwords](https://edu.gcfglobal.org/en/techsavvy/password-tips/1/).

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * [Is Windows an operating system or an application?](https://edu.gcfglobal.org/en/computerbasics/understanding-operating-systems/1/)
  * [What’s the difference between open source and closed source software?](https://edu.gcfglobal.org/en/basic-computer-skills/open-source-vs-closed-source-software/1/)
  * [What are some use cases of a screenshot?](https://edu.gcfglobal.org/en/techsavvy/taking-screenshots/1/)
  * [Give an example of a weak and a strong password.](https://edu.gcfglobal.org/en/techsavvy/password-tips/1/)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * Check out [GCF’s page on “What are accessibility features”](https://edu.gcfglobal.org/en/computerbasics/using-accessibility-features/1/) to learn how you can leverage these features to use your computer efficiently.
  * If you feel like spending more time learning about this topic, check out [FreeCodeCamp’s excellent course on computer basics](https://youtu.be/y2kg3MOk1sY).

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/foundations/installations/computer_basics.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-computer-
basics&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Computer+Basics%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-how-does-the-web-work)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

