Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  Introduction to Git

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

Git is like a really **epic save button** for your files and directories.
Officially, Git is a version control system.

A _save_ in a text editor records all of the words in a document as a single
file. You are only ever given one record of the file, such as `essay.doc`,
unless you make duplicate copies (which is difficult to remember to do and
keep track of):

`essay-draft1.doc`, `essay-draft2.doc`, `essay-final.doc`

However, a _save_ in Git records differences in the files and folders AND
keeps a **historical record of each save**. This feature is a game changer. As
an individual developer, Git enables you to review how your project grows and
to easily look at or restore file states from the past. Once connected to a
network, Git allows you to push your project to GitHub or other alternatives
such as: Bitbucket, Beanstalk, or GitLab for sharing and collaborating with
other developers.

Please note, we **only** support GitHub within our curriculum, and will not
help troubleshoot the alternatives.

While Git works on your _local_ machine, GitHub is a _remote_ storage facility
on the web for all your coding projects. This means that by learning Git, you
will get to showcase your portfolio on GitHub! This is really important
because almost all software development companies consider using Git to be an
**essential skill** for modern web developers. Having a GitHub portfolio will
provide proof to future potential employers as to what you are capable of.

In this lesson, we will briefly explore the history of Git, what it is, and
what it’s useful for.

In the next lesson, we will go over the basic workflow for using Git, which
should enhance your understanding and demonstrate why Git is so useful.

Finally, you will set up a project with Git that will serve as a template for
your future projects.

For now, let’s learn what Git is and why it’s so powerful!

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * Explain what Git and GitHub are and the differences between the two.
  * Describe the differences between Git and a text editor in terms of what they save and their record keeping.
  * Describe why Git is useful for an individual developer and a team of developers.

### Assignment

  1. Read Chapter 1.1 through 1.4 in [this book about version control](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-About-Version-Control) to learn the differences between local, centralized, and distributed version control systems.
  2. Watch [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2ReR1YJrNOM) about what Git is and how it can improve the workflow of both an individual and a team of developers.
  3. Watch [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1h9_cB9mPT8&feature=youtu.be&t=13s) for some history on Git and GitHub, and make sure you know the difference between the two. Git is a technology used in the command line while GitHub is a [website](https://github.com/) you can visit.
  4. If you haven’t yet installed Git, visit the [Setting Up Git](https://www.theodinproject.com/lessons/foundations-setting-up-git) lesson.
  5. Take a look at The Odin Project’s very own [GitHub repository](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum). This is where all the lessons are stored! While you’re there, look at all our [contributors](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/graphs/contributors) to gain an appreciation for how Git records all collaborative efforts and how GitHub visually represents this.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * What kind of program is Git?
  * What are the differences between Git and a text editor in terms of what they save and their record keeping?
  * Does Git work at a local or remote level?
  * Does GitHub work at a local or remote level?
  * [Why is Git useful for developers?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2ReR1YJrNOM)
  * [Why are Git and GitHub useful for a team of developers?](https://youtu.be/1h9_cB9mPT8?t=162)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [What is Git and GitHub?](https://content.red-badger.com/resources/what-is-git-and-github)
  * [What is version control?](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/what-is-version-control)
  * [What is Git](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/what-is-git)

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/git/foundations_git/introduction_to_git.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-
introduction-to-
git&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Introduction+to+Git%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-git-basics)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

