Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![NodeJS](/assets/badge-
nodejs-1432a58382afd13f5bf55d4e5eda07244a3aa5fae9cee98ea034f17d6a09d503.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

#  Project: Odin-Book

[

##  NodeJS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

### Introduction

You’ve come a long way, congratulations! At this point, you should feel
comfortable with building new Express applications and using MongoDB to model
and store data. This project will require you to put all of that knowledge to
the test. It’s not going to be easy, but it should be well within your
capabilities and it will be a _great_ portfolio piece.

You’ll be building a clone of a social media site, such as Facebook, Twitter,
Myspace, or Threads. As with our previous lessons, how much effort you want to
put into the styling and front end is up to you. The important stuff is the
data and backend. You’ll put together the core features of the platform like
users, profiles, posts, following, and “liking”.

You’ll also implement some form of authentication. Ideally, you’ll want to use
passportJS to support authenticating via the social media site you’re cloning,
but some sites (such as Facebook), have recently made this process impossible.
If this is the case for your site, you can use passportJS to support
authenticating via username and password with `passport-local` or via Github
with `passport-github2`.

There will probably be features you haven’t been exposed to such as chat,
real-time updates, and notifications. You won’t be responsible for those
unless you’re feeling really confident in your skills at this point (It’s not
_that_ hard… [look here](https://socket.io/) if you want to see what’s
involved.).

### Assignment

Build a social media site! You’ll build a large portion of the core user
functionality of your chosen site in this project. You don’t have to worry
about some of the more flashy front-end stuff unless you want to, but you
don’t need it to get a nice user experience.

This project will give you the chance to take a relatively high-level set of
requirements and turn it into a functioning website. You’ll need to do some of
your own research and read the documentation for a few of the modules you’ll
be using in this project.

#### Getting started

  1. Think about what you need to do. It’s really helpful to write your plan down on paper or a whiteboard ahead of time! A few hours of thought now will save you days of coding. Try to lay it ALL out. An important part of planning is **scope**. You obviously can’t build the entire website (which presumably took a full team of engineers years to produce), so you’ll need to identify the site’s core functionality and the “nice-to-have” stuff. **Make sure you finish the core functionality BEFORE working on the rest.** If you try to do everything at once, you’ll get lost and frustrated. Trust us. Everything takes longer than you expect.
  2. Think through the data architecture required to make this work. There are lots of models and the relationship between them is more complicated than anything you’ve done before. Take some time to plan your approach before diving in.
  3. Start your app however you like, using the express-generator or from scratch.
  4. Work your way down the list below! Each step will involve a new challenge, but you’ve got the tools.
  5. You can populate data like users and posts with fake data using the [Faker](https://github.com/faker-js/faker) module from npm. To accomplish this create a new JavaScript file named `seeds.js` which imports your Mongoose models and uses the faker module to generate and save a bunch of new users.

#### Requirements

The following requirements are a very global list of features your app should
have. Because of the open-ended nature of this project, it’s possible that not
all of them may apply to your chosen site, and that there might be core
features of your site that aren’t mentioned here.

  1. Users must sign in to see anything except the sign-in page.
  2. Users should be able to sign in using your chosen authentication method.
  3. Users can send follow requests to other users.
  4. Users can create posts (begin with text only).
  5. Users can like posts.
  6. Users can comment on posts.
  7. Posts should always display the post content, author, comments, and likes.
  8. There should be an index page for posts, which shows all the recent posts from the current user and users they are following.
  9. Users can create a profile with a profile picture. You may be able to get the profile picture when users sign in using Omniauth. If this isn’t the case you can use [Gravatar](https://www.gravatar.com/) to generate them
  10. A user’s profile page should contain their profile information, profile photo, and posts.
  11. There should be an index page for users, which shows all users and buttons for sending follow requests to users the user is not already following or have a pending request.
  12. Deploy your app to a hosting provider of your choice!

#### Extra credit

  1. Make posts also allow images (either just via a URL or by uploading one.)
  2. Allow users to upload and update their profile photo.
  3. Create a guest sign-in functionality that allows visitors to bypass the login screen without creating an account or supplying credentials. This is especially useful if you are planning on putting this project on your résumé - most recruiters, hiring managers, etc. will not take the time to create an account. This feature will allow them to look at your hard work without going through a tedious sign-up process.
  4. Make it pretty!

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/nodeJS/final_project/project_odin_book.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnodejs-odin-
book&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Odin-
Book%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

Only logged in users can view user submissions for this project

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/nodejs) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/nodejs-conclusion)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

