Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![JavaScript](/assets/badge-
javascript-626af7075a7914bc4f30bd941268ed883785c3fb29b3e9d023eb5ab6450353bb.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/javascript)

#  Recursive Methods

[

##  JavaScript Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/javascript)

### Introduction

Recursion is the idea that a function calls itself. Pretty simple, right? It’s
used to take a big problem and start breaking it down into smaller and smaller
pieces (“Divide and Conquer”) and continuing to feed their solutions back into
the original function until some sort of answer is achieved and the whole
chain unwinds.

From the [Wikipedia entry on Divide and Conquer
Algorithms](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divide_and_conquer_algorithm):

> In computer science, divide and conquer (D&C) is an important algorithm
> design paradigm based on multi-branched recursion. A divide and conquer
> algorithm works by recursively breaking down a problem into two or more sub-
> problems of the same (or related) type, until these become simple enough to
> be solved directly. The solutions to the sub-problems are then combined to
> give a solution to the original problem.

There’s also a right and wrong way to use recursion. The fact is, any problem
you can solve recursively, you can also solve using the iterators that you
know and love. If you find yourself saying “why didn’t I just use a `while`
loop here?” then you probably should have. You won’t often end up using a
recursive solution to a problem, but you should get a feel for when it might
be a good idea. Some problems also break down into far too many pieces and
totally overwhelm your computer’s memory. There’s a balance.

In this brief lesson, you’ll get a chance to learn more about when and how to
use recursion and then in the next project you will get the chance to apply
some of that (since it probably won’t really stick until you’ve had a chance
to try it).

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * Why is recursion a useful technique for solving a big problem?
  * What are the limitations of using recursive solutions?
  * What types of problems are more suited for simple loops than recursion?
  * What is meant by “recursive depth”?
  * What is a “stack overflow” (the concept, not the website)?
  * Why is that relevant to a recursive problem?

### Assignment

  1. Read [this recursion resource](https://javascript.info/recursion) for a good intro to recursion.
  2. Watch [this explanation of recursion](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6oDQaB2one8) by Web Dev Simplified and [this additional example of recursion](https://youtu.be/LteNqj4DFD8?t=340) by DevSage.
  3. Watch this [Video on Recursion](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mz6tAJMVmfM) from CS50.
  4. Read the [“Implementation Issues” section of the wiki article](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divide_and_conquer_algorithm#Implementation_issues) to get an overview of some of the limitations of recursion.

### Test yourself

  1. Solve each of the questions from this [Code Quiz](https://www.codingame.com/playgrounds/5422/js-interview-prep-recursion) on Recursion. It is not important to have recursive algorithms committed to memory at this point; just understand how to create and use them.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * How would you briefly define a recursive function?
  * [What is the point of recursion? Is it more efficient than using a plain loop?](http://ruby.bastardsbook.com/chapters/recursion/)
  * [What are the 2 essential parts in a recursive function?](https://youtu.be/mz6tAJMVmfM?t=193)
  * [Why is “stack overflow” relevant to a recursive problem?](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divide-and-conquer_algorithm#Stack_size)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [Efficient Recursion from U of Alberta](http://webdocs.cs.ualberta.ca/~holte/T26/efficient-rec.html)
  * [A good resource of recursion by example](https://www.javascripttutorial.net/javascript-recursive-function/)
  * [Visualize how recursion works on factorials](https://pythontutor.com/render.html#code=function%20calcFactorial%28num%29%20%7B%0A%20%20%20%20if%20%28num%20%3D%3D%3D%201%29%20%7B%0A%20%20%20%20%20%20%20%20return%201%3B%0A%20%20%20%20%7D%0A%20%20%20%20return%20num%20*%20calcFactorial%28num%20-%201%29%3B%0A%7D%0A%0AcalcFactorial%285%29%3B&cumulative=false&curInstr=2&heapPrimitives=nevernest&mode=display&origin=opt-frontend.js&py=js&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&textReferences=false)
  * [You may want to watch this nice freecodecamp course. It explains the logic of recursion very well.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IJDJ0kBx2LM&t=2333s)

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/javascript/computer_science/recursive_methods.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fjavascript-recursive-
methods&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Recursive+Methods%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/javascript) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/javascript-recursion)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

