Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![NodeJS](/assets/badge-
nodejs-1432a58382afd13f5bf55d4e5eda07244a3aa5fae9cee98ea034f17d6a09d503.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

#  Security Configuration

[

##  NodeJS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

### Introduction

This lesson is a small one, but it is _incredibly important_. Now that we are
dealing with Authentication, sessions, cookies and user passwords, it is
crucial that we do everything we can so that our authentication system or
databases are not compromised.

### Learning outcomes

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to do the following:

  * Access environment variables using the [process](https://nodejs.org/api/process.html#process_process_env) object in node.
  * Use dotenv to store and make environment variables available to your application globally.
  * Describe how environment variables are handled in version control.
  * Have familiarity with `nconf`’s hierarchical configuration.

### Keep it secret, keep it safe

Essentially, in addition to using encryption to secure user passwords we need
to make sure that important sensitive information such as our Express sessions
secret, our MongoDB url (especially if it includes your username and
password!) and any API keys that you might be using stay hidden. Details such
as these should never get committed to a git repo or otherwise published.

Hiding secrets is easily accomplished and there are a handful of ways to do
it. One of the most common is using an npm package called
[dotenv](https://github.com/motdotla/dotenv#readme). Its usage is simple.
Simply create a file called `.env` in your project directory and fill it with
variables that represent things you need to keep secret using the syntax
`[key]=[value]`, for example, `SECRET_KEY="something hard to guess"`.
**Important note:** you need to add this file to your `gitignore` so that it
does not get committed to git!

A more robust option is the package
[nconf](https://github.com/indexzero/nconf). It can be used in place of or
alongside of dotenv. Basically, it allows you to define configuration files in
multiple ways for ultimate flexibility. For example, you could have a
config.js file that kept all of your secrets, but also add the ability to
override one of those secrets with a command-line argument.

Digging into this package can be useful when creating bigger projects where
app configuration needs to be a little more involved. This package makes it
easy to configure things such as separate production and development
databases, logging and debugging options, or anything else.

### Secrets and PaaS

If you add secrets to a deployed project or a project that you plan on
deploying, you’ll have to research how to import environment variables to the
PaaS you choose to use or else your deployment will fail. For instance, when
using Fly.io, you need to run `fly secrets import < .env` from the command
line.

### Assignment

  1. The main important takeaway here is to KEEP YOUR SECRETS SECRET by never accidentally publishing them.
  2. Read through the documentation for [dotenv](https://github.com/motdotla/dotenv#readme) and [nconf](https://github.com/indexzero/nconf). There are other ways to go about hiding your secrets, but these two packages are popular and widely used.
  3. Go back to your earlier projects and SECURE THEM!

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * If you still want to know more about environment variables [this](https://www.twilio.com/blog/working-with-environment-variables-in-node-js-html) article digs deeper into variations you might encounter moving forward.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * What special kind of variable can be used on a server to store secrets?
  * What are two widely used packages that can be used to store and import these variables?
  * What is the name of the file `dotenv` looks for when injecting these variables into our app?

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/nodeJS/authentication/security_configuration.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnodejs-security-
configuration&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Security+Configuration%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/nodejs) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/nodejs-members-only)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

