Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![NodeJS](/assets/badge-
nodejs-1432a58382afd13f5bf55d4e5eda07244a3aa5fae9cee98ea034f17d6a09d503.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

#  Express 101

[

##  NodeJS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

### Introduction

In the last lesson, we set the stage by explaining quite a bit of the
background information you’ll need to really understand what’s going on as we
start to dive into Express. This lesson will actually start you on the project
that you’ll be completing as you follow the tutorial.

### Learning outcomes

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to do the following:

  * Use `express-generator` to generate a basic express site.
  * Understand the basic parts of an express project.
  * Understand what a Templating Language is and be able to list a couple of popular ones.
  * Understand what Middleware is.
  * Understand `req`, `res` and `next` in the context of middleware.

### Templating engines

A templating engine is a tool that allows you to insert variables and simple
logic into your views. For instance, you could have a header that updates with
the actual user’s name once they’ve logged in, something that is not possible
with plain HTML. As the lesson mentions, there are several templating
languages available for JavaScript. The tutorial uses [Pug (formerly known as
Jade)](https://pugjs.org) which has a bit of a learning curve because it looks
and feels dramatically different from regular HTML. If you’ve ever worked with
Ruby on Rails you might be more comfortable with [ejs](https://ejs.co), which
is _very_ similar to `erb`.

It’s up to you which you choose! If you choose not to use Pug you will still
be able to follow the tutorial just fine. Most of the Odin staff prefer ejs
over Pug simply because we like working with HTML, but in the end, there is
nothing wrong with Pug if you like the look of it or want to learn something
new.

### Middleware

This step of the MDN tutorial mentions middleware, but does not clearly define
it. Middleware is a complicated word for a simple concept. A middleware is
just a plain JavaScript function that Express will call for you between the
time it receives a network request and the time it fires off a response (i.e.
it’s a function that sits in the _middle_ ). You will eventually be using
several of these functions that will run in a specific sequence for every
request.

For example, you might have a logger (that prints details of the request to
the console), an authenticator (that checks to see if the user is logged in,
or otherwise has permission to access whatever they’re requesting) and a
static-file server (if the user is requesting a static file then it will send
it to them). All of these functions will be called in the order you specify
every time there’s a request on the way to your `app.get("/")` function.

It is possible and common to write your own middleware functions (you’ll be
doing that later) so let’s take a minute to demystify what they’re actually
doing. Middleware functions are just plain JavaScript functions with a
specific function signature (that is, it takes a specific set of arguments in
a specific order). You’ve actually already seen it!

The three middleware function arguments are: `req`, `res`, and `next`.
Technically, these are just variables, so you could call them anything, but
convention (and the express documentation) almost always give them these
names.

#### A middleware function:

    
    
    function(req, res, next) {
      // do stuff!
    }
    

When someone visits your site, their web-browser sends a request to your
server. Express takes that request and passes it through all of the middleware
functions that you have defined and used in your project. Each function is
defined with these parameters which might seem familiar to you from the plain
Node tutorial that you went through in the ‘Getting Started’ lesson.
Technically, `req` and `res` are _almost_ the same here as they are in vanilla
Node, but Express enhances them by adding a few useful properties and methods
to them.

`req` or `request` is an object that has data about the incoming request such
as the exact URL that was visited, any parameters in the URL, the `body` of
the request (useful if the user is submitting a form with some data in it) and
many other things.

  * You can see everything it includes in the [express docs](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#req).

`res` or `response` is an object that represents the response that Express is
going to send back to the user. Typically, you use the information in the
`req` to determine what you’re going to do with the `res` by calling
`res.send()` or another method on the object.

  * Check out the documentation for the response object [here!](https://expressjs.com/en/4x/api.html#res)

`next` is a function that you see a little less often, but is _very_ important
to the functioning of your app. If you are writing or using some middleware
that does not send a response back to the user’s client then you _must_ call
the `next` function at the end of your middleware function. The next function
simply tells express to move to the next middleware in the stack, but if you
forget to call it then your app will pause and nothing will happen!

#### An example middleware

As a quick example, if you wanted to create a simple logging middleware you
could write a function like this:

    
    
    const myLogger = function(req, res, next) {
      console.log("Request IP: " + req.ip);
      console.log("Request Method: " + req.method);
      console.log("Request date: " + new Date());
    
      next(); // THIS IS IMPORTANT!
    }
    
    app.use(myLogger)
    

`app.use` is how you load your middleware function into Express so that it
knows to use it. If you stick this bit of code in any express application near
the beginning of your `app.js` (after the part where you define `app =
express()`) then it will write all of those details to your console every time
you get a network request. When the logging is complete we call the `next()`
function so that our app can continue.

As a final detail, the order that middleware gets executed in your app
matters! Middleware functions will always run in the order that they are
instantiated using `app.use()`.

### Using Git

As you work through this tutorial, make sure to put the `node_modules` folder
in a `.gitignore` file.

### Assignment

  1. Read this [intro article](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Server-side/Express_Nodejs/Tutorial_local_library_website) on MDN.
  2. Begin the project by following [this lesson](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Server-side/Express_Nodejs/skeleton_website). Be sure to read everything carefully! There’s quite a bit of important information in this article. You only have to do part 2 for now. We will continue where we leave off later.
  3. For a little more detail on the nature of middleware read the official documentation [here](http://expressjs.com/en/guide/using-middleware.html).

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * What is middleware?
  * What is the `req` object?
  * What is the `res` object?
  * Why is `next` important?
  * What does `app.use` do?

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * It looks like this lesson doesn’t have any additional resources yet. Help us expand this section by contributing to our curriculum.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/nodeJS/express_and_mongoose/express_101.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnodejs-
express-101&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Express+101%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/nodejs) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/nodejs-express-102-crud-and-
mvc)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

