Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Getting Hired](/assets/badge-getting-
hired-03b3463749a1cd7dd5358c585b0c35c2878bbde91aa0800f641992eeb69f7c66.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-hired)

#  What You Can Do to Prepare

[

##  Getting Hired Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-
hired)

### Introduction

Taking a structured approach to getting hired means starting early and getting
some important things out of the way first.

### Get good!

Navigating this process can be a beast but don’t let it distract you from
building your skills, which ultimately will determine if you get the job or
not. This course assumes you’ve already made it through the other courses and
have accomplished enough in their completion to elevate you to competence. If
not, you’ve got to ruthlessly address your weak points (even if it’s the
tricky stuff like algorithms and data structures) in order to be qualified for
the kinds of positions you’re applying to.

### Craft a narrative

You may be uncomfortable “selling yourself” but that’s exactly what you’ll
have to do. Luckily, that doesn’t mean acting like a used car salesman; it’s
more subtle than you think. It really means crafting a story about who you
are, how you got to where you are, and why you’ll keep growing. Everyone can
tell a story. So put some effort into crafting a compelling narrative that
stitches together your background (especially if you come from a non-
traditional background) into a compelling and unavoidable wave of capability
and drive.

  * [How to Explain Your Career Transition by Dorie Clark](https://hbr.org/2013/04/how-to-explain-your-career-tra)

### Build a portfolio

All along the way, you should keep building things. The work you’ve done will
be crucial to demonstrating your technical skill and getting hired. Employers
want to see that you can build and ship code and that you make good decisions
when confronted with engineering trade-offs. All of this stems from
conversations about your portfolio of work.

The portfolio is also important for another thing that isn’t mentioned much –
social proof. If you’ve been a part of larger or group projects, that’s almost
like showing that you’ve worked somewhere before. It makes the employer
comfortable that other people have worked with you before so they can too.

Speaking of group projects, participating in the open source community is a
great way to showcase your skills and collaborate with other developers. If
you’re looking for your first open source project to contribute to, start with
TOP! We’re always looking for ways to improve our curriculum, main site, and
odin-bot v2, so check out our [repositories on
GitHub](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) to get started. While you’re at it,
check out this [Dev.to article](https://dev.to/opensauced/how-i-got-hired-
contributing-to-open-source-projects-546i) to learn you can leverage open
source contributions in your job search.

Your portfolio as a developer is GitHub. You may have a personal website but
GitHub is still the authoritative repository of your technical ability. Ignore
it at your peril.

  * [A Programmer’s Portfolio by Jeff Atwood](https://blog.codinghorror.com/a-programmers-portfolio/)
  * [The Power of a Programming Portfolio by GrokCode](http://grokcode.com/58/the-power-of-a-programming-portfolio/)
  * [Your GitHub Portfolio by Forbes](http://www.forbes.com/sites/anthonykosner/2012/10/20/software-engineers-are-in-demand-and-github-is-how-you-find-them/)

### Clean up your web presence (and have one)

Google yourself in an incognito window (to avoid Google’s smart algorithm).
What comes up? Do the links fit into your personal narrative? Whoever is
looking to hire you will certainly Google you. Make sure that what they find
matches what you want them to find. If you’ve got a ridiculously common name,
you may have a harder time building your web presence but it’s also harder to
have the _wrong_ web presence.

The most important part of your web presence to fix up is your GitHub profile.
Make sure your projects are organized and their README files contain a
description and a link to where it is live so anyone looking at the project
can quickly see your brilliance.

Next, try to be discoverable. If we’re trying to get in touch with you or find
your work on the web, can I? Do you have a personal website? Are you on
Twitter? You don’t need to go crazy with social media, but sometimes just
having enough of a profile to be a “real” person and give people the
opportunity to get in touch with you can go a long way.

Use LinkedIn if you’re not allergic to it. Again, this is about getting your
personal narrative out there in the way YOU choose and not relying on Google
to get it right. LinkedIn is fast replacing the resume anyway.

Other sites, like Brand Yourself below, will describe a bit better how to take
on your web presence, but just make sure your narrative is being told the way
you want it to.

  * [Brand Yourself helps you… brand… yourself. Basic services are free.](http://brandyourself.com)
  * [Control Your Online Reputation from Monster](https://web.archive.org/web/20201123201302/https://www.monster.com/career-advice/article/control-your-online-reputation)
  * [How Important Is It for a Programmer to Have an Online Presence? on Stack Exchange](http://programmers.stackexchange.com/questions/143673/how-important-is-it-for-a-programmer-to-have-an-online-presence)
  * [How to Build Your Digital Presence as a Software Developer](https://blog.pramp.com/how-to-build-your-digital-presence-as-a-software-developer-cb61c4c1aab)

### Get out in the community and collect information

Find and meet other developers. That doesn’t mean “power networking” but it
does mean genuine human connection. Your network of people DOES matter in a
BIG way. For now, it’s probably just for answering questions and harvesting
advice but your next job will probably be found through the people you know
and some who you meet while you’re gathering this advice. People like giving
advice and like investing themselves emotionally in other people with growth
curves.

That’s best to do in person 1-on-1, where you can ask your dumb questions, but
there are plenty of communities as well, e.g. Meetups, Stack Overflow, Quora,
local user groups… Be a part of them and don’t be afraid to ask questions.
That’s a great way to build relationships.

You’ll probably have a million questions but the relevant ones here are about
understanding what exactly different jobs _are_ and what they’re looking for.
The easiest way to find out is ask developers what they do. It’s much faster
than trolling through blog posts trying to figure out the process. Buy lunches
and coffees if you must. Set a goal of talking to 5 real human beings about
your job search.

Another way to get this information is to check out a whole bunch of job
postings. You’ll quickly start seeing similarities between them. Yeah, it’s
shit work, but it must be done.

Another facet of this is related to your web presence – don’t be afraid to
produce content like blogging or answering questions on Quora. They don’t need
to be explicitly technical, but should showcase your ability to think
critically and write well. Both of these play well with future employers.

  * [How to Win Friends and Influence People](http://erudition.mohit.tripod.com/_Influence_People.pdf) is an essential classic that relates to business and networking but is applicable to all facets of the social world around you. It’s a must-read for everyone (and it’s an easy read).

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/getting_hired/preparing_for_job_search/what_you_can_do_to_prepare.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-getting-hired-
what-you-can-do-to-
prepare&template=suggestion.yaml&title=What+You+Can+Do+to+Prepare%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/getting-hired) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-getting-hired-
building-your-personal-website)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

