Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Intermediate HTML and CSS](/assets/badge-html-
css-91bc8d9c7ebb2e2f73eeb302c38a92d9ba6f182301dbd1868d7198fcc8376aeb.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/intermediate-html-and-css)

#  CSS Units

[

##  Intermediate HTML and CSS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/intermediate-html-and-css)

### Introduction

There are many different units that you can use to define sizes in CSS. This
lesson will introduce the most important to you, and show you where to learn
about the rest of them.

### Learning outcomes

  * You’ll learn the difference between relative and absolute units
  * You’ll learn when it’s appropriate to use the different units.

### Absolute units

Absolute units are those that are always the same in any context. `px` is an
absolute unit because the size of a pixel doesn’t change relative to anything
else on the page. In fact, `px` is the only absolute unit you should be using
for web projects. The rest of them make more sense in a print setting because
they are related to physical units such as `in` (inch) and `cm` (centimeter).

### Relative units

Relative units are units that can change based on their context. There are
several of them that you are likely to encounter and want to use.

#### em and rem

`em` and `rem` both refer to a font size, though they are often used to define
other sizes in CSS. You’ll see both of them often so we’re going to explain
both, but as a rule-of-thumb, prefer `rem`.

`1em` is the `font-size` of an element (or the element’s parent if you’re
using it to set `font-size`). So, for example, if an element’s `font-size` is
`16px`, then setting its width to `4em` would make its width `64px` (`16 * 4
== 64`).

`1rem` is the `font-size` of the root element (either `:root` or `html`). The
math works the same with `rem` as it did with `em`, but without the added
complexity of keeping track of the parent’s font size. Relying on `em` could
mean that a particular size could change if the context changes, which is very
likely not the behavior you want.

Using a relative size like `rem` to define font sizes across your website _is_
recommended. Many browsers allow users to change the base font-size to
increase readability. If at all possible, it is advisable to respect a user’s
wishes regarding font size. You’ll learn more about this from the reading
assignments.

#### Viewport units

The units `vh` and `vw` relate to the size of the viewport. Specifically,
`1vh` is equal to `1%` of the viewport height and `1vw` is equal to `1%` of
the viewport width. These can be useful any time you want something to be
sized relative to the viewport, examples including full-height heroes, full-
screen app-like interfaces.

### Assignment

  1. [CSS values and units](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Building_blocks/Values_and_units) covers all the available units.
  2. The article [CSS units](https://codyloyd.com/2021/css-units/) goes in depth on how and when you might want to use `em`, `rem`, or `px`.
  3. [Fun with Viewport Units](https://css-tricks.com/fun-viewport-units/) demonstrates some interesting things you can do with `vh` and `vw`.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * Why would you want to use `em` or `rem` for font-size instead of `px`?
  * What are some instances where you might want to use `vh` and `vw`?
  * [What are some instances where you might want to use `px` instead of a relative unit?](https://codyloyd.com/2021/css-units/)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental for if you need to dive deeper into something.

  * Watch [are you using the right CSS unit?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N5wpD9Ov_To) if you’d like to learn Kevin Powells general rules of thumb when it comes to choosing the correct CSS units for different situations.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/intermediate_html_css/intermediate_css_concepts/css_units.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-intermediate-
html-and-css-css-
units&template=suggestion.yaml&title=CSS+Units%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/intermediate-html-and-css) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/node-path-intermediate-html-and-css-more-text-styles)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

