Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![NodeJS](/assets/badge-
nodejs-1432a58382afd13f5bf55d4e5eda07244a3aa5fae9cee98ea034f17d6a09d503.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

#  Express 102: CRUD and MVC

[

##  NodeJS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

### Introduction

After setting up the skeleton for your project it’s time to set up the
database. As usual, there’s quite a bit of background information that you
will find useful as you progress.

### Learning outcomes

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to do the following:

  * Explain CRUD and how it correlates to HTTP methods in Express.
  * Describe MVC and how it correlates to Express.
  * Describe databases and ORMs as well as how to use them with Node/Express apps.
  * Design and create your own models using Mongoose.
  * Declare object schema and models.
  * Describe the main field types and basic validation.
  * List a few ways to access model data.
  * Test models by creating a number of instances (using a standalone script).

### CRUD

CRUD is a concept that comes up a lot in web development, and it’s the type of
thing that might show up in interview questions so it’s worth taking a little
time to make sure you understand what it refers to. Thankfully, it’s a
relatively simple concept.

CRUD stands for: _Create, Read, Update_ and _Delete_. These are the four basic
functions that you will be building into your database driven apps. Put
simply, if you are designing a CRUD interface that means that users can expect
to be able to do these 4 things to items in the database (providing they have
the appropriate permissions of course).

In your library example, this simply means that we are going to be building
the ability for users to `create` entries (add books, authors or genres to the
database), `read` entries (or, retrieve lists of books and other things from
the database), `update` entries (edit details of an entry), and `delete`
entries (remove them from the database).

Of course, this is simply a concept and not some sort of rule that must be
followed. You may not want to allow users to do all of these actions, or you
may want to limit which users can do what at any given time. For example, if
you are creating a social networking site, you might only allow users to
`read` the profile information of their friends or connections, and you might
not want to allow people to `delete` things at all.

The CRUD operations roughly correlate to the HTTP methods that you can employ
in an express app. This definition can be somewhat flexible, but in general
`create` correlates to `POST` (or `app.post()` in an express app), `read`
correlates to `GET` (`app.get()`), `update` to `PUT` (`app.put()`) and
`delete` to `DELETE` (`app.delete()`)

### MVC

MVC is another common concept in web development and also something that is
likely to come up in an interview question. MVC stands for _Model, View,
Controller_ and refers to the architecture of your code. Basically, it is a
way to organize your application by separating all of the actions into 3 main
components: Models, Views and Controllers.

**Models** are the basic building blocks of your database. So for every type
of entry in your DB (book, author, etc. in our Library Project), you’ll create
a model that will hold the details of that type of entry. Models define the
types of information that get used by your views and controllers.

**Views** are, of course, the component that generates the UI for your
application. In our case, we’ve selected a templating engine that uses data
supplied by a controller to display the desired information.

**Controllers** are the components that decide what view to display and what
information is going to be put into it.

#### MVC example

Without digging into the code prematurely, consider a very simple photo-
uploading site. Users can upload and then view photos that are all listed on
an index somewhere. In this case, we’ll have a model for our photos that would
define how our photos are stored in the database (DB). The model might specify
that photos should be objects that have a `filename`, a `URL` and a `date-
created` field.

We’ll need two views, 1) the index, and 2) the display-photo view which will
just display a single photo.

Our controller then would be called by Express whenever we get an `app.get()`
request. It would then use the details of the request to determine which view
is shown, and which image is displayed depending on whether the user is
requesting the index or a specific photo’s page.

If this is a little confusing at this point, don’t worry about it too much.
You will be creating models, views, and controllers in the tutorial and it
will all become much clearer once you see them in use.

### Which database should you choose?

One final note before diving back into the tutorial. Express does not care
about which database you use. The lesson lists a few options but ultimately
uses MongoDB. In this case, the actual DB you use matters little. If you later
decide that you would rather use SQL or something else, you should be able to
pick it up fairly easily by reading the documentation. At this point, Mongo is
probably the most popular choice to use with Express so we recommend just
sticking with that for now.

### Assignment

  1. Continue where we left off with the [MDN library tutorial (Part 3)!](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Server-side/Express_Nodejs/mongoose)

### Knowledge checks

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * What does CRUD stand for?
  * What does the Model in “MVC” refer to?
  * What does the View in “MVC” refer to?
  * What does the Controller in “MVC” refer to?

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * For a deeper explanation of MVC you could read [this article from freeCodeCamp](https://medium.freecodecamp.org/simplified-explanation-to-mvc-5d307796df30).
  * This [crash course video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DZBGEVgL2eE) from Web Dev Simplified gives a run-down of how you should expect to use MongoDB (Mongoose) in Node.js, as well as some advanced things you can do with object schemas.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/nodeJS/express_and_mongoose/express_102_crud_and_mvc.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnodejs-express-102-crud-
and-
mvc&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Express+102%3A+CRUD+and+MVC%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/nodejs) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/nodejs-mini-message-board)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

