Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Getting Hired](/assets/badge-getting-
hired-03b3463749a1cd7dd5358c585b0c35c2878bbde91aa0800f641992eeb69f7c66.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-hired)

#  Project: Building Your Personal Website

[

##  Getting Hired Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-
hired)

### Introduction

You don’t need a personal website right off the bat but it’s good to have and
it’s a fun project to test your skills with. In the simplest case, it’s a
direct conduit to you for anyone searching and another way to craft your
narrative. It doesn’t have to be elaborate at all. If you hate writing, don’t
blog. But you need to be a real person. Showcase your work. Geek out.

For this project, it’s best for you to identify the personal websites of
several people you admire and see what you think they’ve done right. In
general, it’s best to keep your site simple, clean and to the point rather
than bloated and full of “look what I can do!” features. Let your portfolio of
work speak for itself.

  * [Why Every Job Seeker Should Have a Personal Website](http://www.forbes.com/sites/jacquelynsmith/2013/04/26/why-every-job-seeker-should-have-a-personal-website-and-what-it-should-include/)

### Documentation

Don’t underestimate the importance of high quality documentation on your
projects. As a professional developer writing good documentation is a must. As
a job seeker it’s a hidden opportunity to shine. Your projects should include
a useful README and at least one screenshot. Include a section about why you
built the project and another section with instructions to run the project
locally.

Remember to write some documentation for both technical and non-technical
audience. A potential employer should be able to follow your documentation,
regardless of their technical background.

  * [A Beginner’s Guide to Writing Documentation](http://www.writethedocs.org/guide/writing/beginners-guide-to-docs/)

### Show designs

A list of portfolios of professional developers. Students should analyze these
sites to understand what should be on their portfolios and how it should be
presented.

Links for designs

  * [Stratis Bakas](https://stratisbakas.com/)
  * [Matt Farley](https://mattfarley.ca/)
  * [Dejan Markovic](https://www.dejan.works/)
  * [Rafael Caferati](https://caferati.me/)
  * [Ian Lunn](https://ianlunn.co.uk/)
  * [Ben Adam](https://benadam.me/)
  * [Seb Kay](https://sebkay.com/)
  * [Jonny MacEachern](https://jonny.me/)
  * [Andriy Chemerynskiy](https://andrewchmr.com/)
  * [Chris Ota’s Portfolio](https://www.otadesigns.com/)
  * [Pierre Nel](https://pierre.io/)
  * [Adrien Laurent’s Portfolio](https://adrienlaurent.fr/)
  * [Thomas’ Portfolio](https://www.thomasbosc.com)
  * [Timmy O’Mahony](https://timmyomahony.com/)
  * [Elliot’s Portfolio](https://elliotcondon.com/)
  * [James Warner](https://jmswrnr.com/)
  * [Tiago Sá’s Portfolio](https://i-am-tiago.com/)
  * [Patrick David](https://bepatrickdavid.com/)
  * [Luis Krötz](https://luiskr.com/)
  * [Leonid Kostetckyi](https://lk.emotion-agency.com/)

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/getting_hired/preparing_for_job_search/project_portfolio.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-getting-hired-
building-your-personal-
website&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Building+Your+Personal+Website%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

Only logged in users can view user submissions for this project

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/getting-hired) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-getting-hired-
collecting-job-leads)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

