Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Intermediate HTML and CSS](/assets/badge-html-
css-91bc8d9c7ebb2e2f73eeb302c38a92d9ba6f182301dbd1868d7198fcc8376aeb.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/intermediate-html-and-css)

#  Default Styles

[

##  Intermediate HTML and CSS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/intermediate-html-and-css)

### Introduction

Browsers, by default, inject a little bit of style into your web projects. You
may not have thought about this specifically, but you have definitely
encountered it.

### Learning outcomes

  * You’ll learn about default browser styles
  * You’ll learn how to use a CSS reset to remove or change those default styles

### Default styles

When you did the first [HTML Recipes
project](https://www.theodinproject.com/lessons/foundations-recipes), you
would have noticed that some elements already have a little bit of style
applied to them. An `h1`, for instance, is bigger and bolder than regular
text. Links (`a`) are blue and underlined. Lists (`ul` and `ol`) both have a
bunch of padding surrounding them. Browsers accomplish this by inserting a
little bit of CSS into every webpage. ([Here is Chrome’s default HTML
stylesheet](https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/blink/+/refs/heads/main/Source/core/css/html.css))

The problem with this is that there is no guarantee that different browsers
will style everything the same. In general, inconsistencies are going to be
pretty minor, but they DO exist. Also, in many cases as a developer, you’re
going to end up undoing or redoing all of this default styling to make your
site look exactly how you envision it.

To counter this, many developers start their projects with a “CSS Reset”; a
file that undoes browser defaults, so that every element behaves the same in
every browser.

You don’t _have_ to use a CSS reset. In many cases, you’re going to end up
undoing, or redoing a lot of the styles that a reset will provide for you. You
can decide whether or not you want to use one on a regular basis, but it’s
worth taking the time to dig through a couple now. Understanding exactly how
they’re doing what they’re doing is a useful exercise!

### Assignment

  1. [The Meyer Reset](https://meyerweb.com/eric/tools/css/reset/) is almost certainly the most popular. It’s very simple and basically removes every default style.
  2. [Normalize.css](http://nicolasgallagher.com/about-normalize-css/) is another popular one. It’s a little different in that it doesn’t remove all the default styles, but tweaks them slightly to ensure that browsers are consistent. Currently, the article’s download link is dead. If you want to install normalize.css for your project, download it from [normalize.css official website](https://necolas.github.io/normalize.css/) or use the instructions found in the [normalize.css repository’s](https://github.com/necolas/normalize.css) `README.md` file. If you are unsure which method to use, go with the NPM package install.
  3. [Reboot, Resets and Reasoning](https://css-tricks.com/reboot-resets-reasoning/) is a CSS tricks article that goes a little more in-depth, and mentions a few other popular resets.
  4. Maybe more trivial than useful, this [Browser Default Styles](https://browserdefaultstyles.com/) site is fun to play with.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * Why would you want to use a CSS reset?

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [A Look at CSS Resets in 2018](https://bitsofco.de/a-look-at-css-resets-in-2018/) is another article that talks about the various resets out there.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/intermediate_html_css/intermediate_css_concepts/default_styles.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-intermediate-
html-and-css-default-
styles&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Default+Styles%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/intermediate-html-and-css) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/node-path-intermediate-html-and-css-css-units)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

