Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Getting Hired](/assets/badge-getting-
hired-03b3463749a1cd7dd5358c585b0c35c2878bbde91aa0800f641992eeb69f7c66.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-hired)

#  Project: Building Your Resume

[

##  Getting Hired Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-
hired)

### Introduction

The goal of a resume is to get them interested enough to start a conversation.
From there, it’s on you to speak intelligently about the things you’ve done.
So don’t treat the resume as the catch-all repository of your whole life –
it’s more of a focused marketing tool designed to make you seem worth taking
another look at.

A developer’s resume is an interesting thing because so much of your value is
demonstrated from your projects, which live in your GitHub (and are hopefully
also deployed somewhere online). Despite this focus on projects, you can’t
ignore previous work experience or education. They are both important for
showing the social proof that other people have worked with you before and
you’ve met their standards for applying.

It’s difficult to come up with (or find on the internet) a standard resume
type for a junior developer. Most of the ones out there aren’t particularly
inspiring. The keys to remember are the perspective of the hiring manager we
talked about before – that person wants to hire a developer who is highly
capable and can get shit done (and will add value ASAP).

The hiring manager will determine these criteria in less than 10 seconds at
first glance based on where you’ve been educated, who’s hired you before, and
if you’ve got any really interesting projects that stand out. The hiring
manager rapidly builds a story of who you are based on those headline items of
your resume. If you’re lucky, that high level story will seem interesting
enough for the hiring manager or HR person to look twice and actually read
what you did at each job and then bring you in for an interview.

Knowing that perspective, how can you play to it? It’s difficult if you’re
breaking into a new industry so you’ll need to emphasize relevant education,
work experience and projects in a way that crafts a story of drive and
capability. What have you done that shows you’re highly capable (e.g. your
technical chops, any recognition you’ve received, leadership of teams)? And
can get shit done (e.g. interesting projects, open source contributions)?

Remember: ONE PAGE.

  * [This Career Tool Belt article lists 6 free resume builder websites](https://www.careertoolbelt.com/5-best-free-resume-builder-websites/)
  * [Novorésumé also has a free tier with templates available, as an alternate resource](https://novoresume.com/)
  * [Formatting could use some work, but here’s an example resume from CareerCup.com](http://www.careercup.com/resume)
  * [Another great (totally free) resume builder](https://flowcv.io/)

### Optional reading

  * [Getting Your Résumé Read, by Joel Spolsky](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/ResumeRead.html)

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/getting_hired/applying_and_interviewing/project_resume.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-getting-hired-
building-your-
resume&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Building+Your+Resume%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/getting-hired) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-getting-hired-
applying-for-web-development-jobs)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

