Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  Asking For Help

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

Along your programming journey, you will inevitably need to ask questions in
an online coding community like ours, or in conversations with your
colleagues. While asking questions may seem rather simple, in a programming
environment it is essential to ask well formed questions with as much context
as needed so you can get the most out of asking for help. In essence, “help
others help you!” This lesson will provide you with the tools to effectively
ask questions in communities such as our Discord chat, Stack Overflow, and in
the workplace!

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * Explain techniques for asking programming questions.
  * Explain and avoid qualities of “bad” questions.
  * Ask effective and well formed questions.

### Tips for getting the best help possible

#### Always provide your code and the surrounding context

When asking a question, it is essential to provide your code, error message,
terminal command, server output, etc. You should provide as much context as
possible and zero in on the specific problem, such as pointing people to a
specific function or line number in your code. Providing this relevant
information makes it easy for others to help you.

If your question does not provide any code or other relevant information, it
will be difficult for others to help you. In order to fully understand your
question, there will be a lot of unnecessary back and forth conversation. This
can be discouraging for you because any answers with incomplete information
will not solve your problem. This process can be frustrating for those helping
because the meaning of your original question changes as you add more context
to it. If you truly want to ask a conceptual question, you should indicate
this as part of your question.

#### Ask about the problem at hand, not the solution itself

A lot of learners ask exactly how to approach a given task or assignment in
this curriculum, such as the below:

  * “How do I complete Step 5 of the Rock Paper Scissors Assignment”?

Keep in mind that you’re actually supposed to figure out how to solve the
assignments yourself, and figuring out an approach is essential to your
learning journey. A much better question might look like this:

  * “Hey, I’m trying to return a string that displays the winner in Rock Paper Scissors, but I’m getting a syntax error on line 12. How can I fix this? Here’s my code.”

In sharing your attempt, people know what you’ve tried and won’t suggest
things that might not have worked out for you. It also allows them to debug
your current iteration of code, rather than sending you down a path that has
you start all over again when you might be very close to a solution.

Now, if you’re completely stuck with where to start, it’s completely fine to
let people know that you’re stuck. Asking where you can start and what you can
research to get on the right track empowers you to be able to resolve issues
largely on your own in the future, and might even empower you to help others
with the same issue later on. It is also recommended that you share your
pseudo code so people can nudge you in the right direction or correct any
misunderstandings you may have.

#### Don’t take asking for more context to heart

People who volunteer in coding communities are here to help! But a question
you may feel is coherent and “obvious” probably isn’t if you are being asked
for more context. While something may seem “obvious” to a beginner, it’s
sometimes nowhere near “obvious” to an expert. An expert knows about many,
many more situations that could cause an issue someone is experiencing, and
would want to refrain from sending a learner down the wrong path. People take
time out of their day to help, so make it as easy as possible for them to help
you! There’s probably a good reason why they need more information, so trust
their judgment and experience when they ask. Many people who help in coding
chats are unpaid volunteers, and are in no way obligated to answer your query.
But because they truly do want to help you, they will ask for more information
when needed!

### Assignment

  1. [Don’t ask to ask, just ask](https://dontasktoask.com/) demonstrates the importance of just asking your question and not asking to ask your question.
  2. Read about the [“XY Problem”](https://xyproblem.info/), which is a common pitfall both new and experienced programmers fall into when asking questions.
  3. Read and bookmark our community guide [How to Ask Technical Questions](https://www.theodinproject.com/guides/community/how_to_ask). It is a great reference to refer to whenever you find yourself needing to ask for help, and you might find yourself solving your own problem as you think about the points listed in the article.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * [Describe the “XY Problem”.](https://xyproblem.info/)
  * [Name the 5 things your question should include.](https://www.theodinproject.com/guides/community/how_to_ask)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * It looks like this lesson doesn’t have any additional resources yet. Help us expand this section by contributing to our curriculum.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/foundations/introduction/asking_for_help.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-asking-for-
help&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Asking+For+Help%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-join-the-odin-community)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

