Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  Commit Messages

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

This lesson will explain the importance of good commit messages, how to write
them, when to commit, and why having a history of good commits is so
important!

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * How to write a meaningful commit message
  * Why meaningful commit messages are important
  * When to commit

### Are commit messages so important they deserve their own lesson?

Yes! Let me give you a quick list of reasons why:

  * When you are applying for jobs, employers will look through your projects on GitHub and they will look through your commit history. Having good commits as a novice developer will help you stand out.

  * Having a good commit message history will allow you (or other developers working on your code) to quickly see what changes were made and why. This is useful if a bug is found in the code that needs to be fixed!

  * Having a good commit message history will also be helpful if you come back to a project you were working on after stepping away from it for a while. You likely won’t remember your thought process and changes made when initially writing out the code.

### Bad vs. good commits

When it comes to writing commits, it is crucial to know how to write them
effectively. Here’s an example of a bad commit message:

    
    
    fix a bug
    

Even though it describes what you did, the message is too vague, which leaves
the other developers on your team confused. A good commit message will explain
the **why** behind your changes. In other words, a commit message describes
what problem your changes solve and how it solves them.

Effective commits consist of two separate parts: a subject, and a body:

#### Subject

A brief summary of the change you made to the project.

    
    
    This is the change I made to the codebase.
    

GitHub has a 72-character limit so we recommend keeping your commits’ subject
to within this amount.

#### Body

A concise yet clear description of what you did.

    
    
    Describe the problem your commit solves and how.
    

Now that we learned the secret to creating a good commit message, let’s try
and fix the commit message from earlier:

    
    
    Add missing link and alt text to the company's logo
    
    Screen readers won't read the images to users with disabilities without this information
    

Ahh, that’s better! :) Now, developers can gain a better understanding of this
commit message because it does the following:

  * Provides a subject that specifies your code’s action (e.g., “Add missing link and alt text to the company’s logo”)
  * Contains a body that provides a concise yet clear description of why the commit needed to be made (e.g., “Screen readers won’t read the images to users with disabilities without this information”)
  * Separates the subject from the body with a new/blank line. This is a best practice we highly recommend following. It makes commit messages easier for other developers to read.

### When to commit

A good way to view a commit is like a “snapshot” of your code at the moment
that it was made. That version of your code up to that point will be saved for
you to revert back to or look back at.

When writing code, it’s considered best practice to commit every time you have
a meaningful change in the code. This will create a timeline of your progress
and show that your finished code didn’t appear out of nowhere.

In other words, make a commit if you get a piece of code you are working on to
function like you want it to, fix a typo, or fix a bug. As you gain
experience, you will develop a better feel for what should be committed!

There will come a time when you are working on a project and you FINALLY get
something just right (this would be a good time to commit), and then maybe 30
seconds to a few days later it breaks. You have no idea what you changed,
everything _looks_ to be the same and you don’t remember editing that line,
but alas, it isn’t working how you want it anymore. You’d be able to go back
through your commit history and either revert your code back to the last
commit you made when you first got that part working or go back and see what
your code looked like at that point in time.

### Assignment

  1. This article, [How to Write a Git Commit Message](https://cbea.ms/git-commit), covers all the main bases on how to write good commit messages. The whole article is great and informative but the meat of the article is “The seven rules of a great commit message.”

### Tips and things to remember:

  * Using VSCode as your text editor (you should have set this up in the Git Basics section) will allow you to easily make multi-line commit messages, easily see the character length of each line, and will allow you to use [VSCode spell check extensions](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=streetsidesoftware.code-spell-checker) to make sure your spelling is correct
  * Use an active voice: “Fix card generator”
  * Avoid using vague commit messages such as “saved” or “updated”
  * Commit early and often!

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * [What are two benefits of having well-written commit messages and a good commit history?](https://cbea.ms/git-commit/#intro)
  * [How many characters should the subject line of your commit message be?](https://cbea.ms/git-commit/#limit-50)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * One way to formulate high-information commit messages is to follow a template. [Conventional commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/) is one of many commit message templates that you can explore.
  * Explore this amazing tutorial video on Conventional Commits ➔ [Full Video Link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OJqUWvmf4gg). The video showcases the Conventional Commits template from the resource above. It also mentions creating releases and shows using something called “Yarn”. These two parts are out of scope for this part of the course, so don’t worry about them and instead focus on the commit template.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/git/foundations_git/commit_messages.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-commit-
messages&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Commit+Messages%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-recipes)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

