Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Getting Hired](/assets/badge-getting-
hired-03b3463749a1cd7dd5358c585b0c35c2878bbde91aa0800f641992eeb69f7c66.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-hired)

#  Handling a Job Offer

[

##  Getting Hired Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-
hired)

### Introduction

If you kicked butt, you’ll get an offer. That means there’s a pretty good
chance you’ll get to work there, but just remember that not all “offers”
(especially verbal-only ones) are actually real. It’s a good time to be happy
because you did well but don’t expect that it’s a done deal. We’ve seen
companies pull offers for internal reasons or external reasons – the point is
that it happens, so don’t go buying a house until you’ve signed the documents.
If it’s just a verbal offer, ask them to email you the details.

DO NOT ACCEPT RIGHT AWAY! This is doubly true if you don’t think it’s a good
offer. This is an important point for you – they’ve been totally in control of
the process until now and they’ve probably dragged their feet because they can
(who knows, an even better developer might show up, right?). Now it’s your
turn. They’ve put in a lot of effort so far and any reasonable company isn’t
going to let you walk away over a few days or a few thousand dollars. They
should give you at least a week to decide.

One big factor is compensation. The person making the offer usually has
discretion to bump it up a bit (maybe $5k in Silicon Valley, probably less
elsewhere) without asking their manager, so it’s often a good idea to
negotiate the first offer. Maybe you’re negotiating salary, vacation,
relocation bonuses, or personal project status. It doesn’t matter, your
position is a whole lot better while you’re holding that offer.

What’s the best thing you can do? GET ANOTHER OFFER! There’s nothing nearly as
good when negotiating as another offer from another company which gives you
the ability to walk away. You shouldn’t be shamelessly callous and
capitalistic about it (the goal isn’t to piss off everyone who gave you
offers), but do take advantage of this!

Not only that, but remember all those companies that dragged their feet and
you hadn’t heard back from? Send every one of them (who you are realistically
interested in) an email explaining that you have an offer and need to make a
decision relatively quickly. See if that doesn’t help them speed you along in
the process and maybe get you that other offer. As soon as you have an offer
to work with, you suddenly have all that social proof you never had before
since you haven’t worked anywhere else. Use it.

Once you’ve worked through your negotiation and hopefully had the chance to
rank multiple offers, the decision must be made. That’s a good choice to have
to make. Congratulations! Now you get paid to keep learning.

### Links

  * [Ten Rules for Negotiating a Job Offer](https://haseebq.com/my-ten-rules-for-negotiating-a-job-offer/) \- Long blog but worth the read to get in the right mindset.
  * [Negotiating your Startup Offer from Rob.by](https://web.archive.org/web/20180626035838/http://rob.by/2013/negotiating-your-startup-job-offer/) gets into the equity component of some offers.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/getting_hired/applying_and_interviewing/handling_an_offer.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-getting-hired-
handling-a-job-
offer&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Handling+a+Job+Offer%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/getting-hired) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-getting-hired-
conclusion)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

