Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  Working with Text

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

Most content on the web is text-based, so you will find yourself needing to
work with HTML text elements quite a bit.

In this lesson, we will learn about the text-based elements you are likely to
use the most.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * How to create paragraphs.
  * How to create headings.
  * How to create bold text.
  * How to create italicized text.
  * The relationships between nested elements.
  * How to create HTML comments.

### Paragraphs

What would you expect the following text to output on an HTML page?

    
    
    <body>
      Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit, sed do eiusmod tempor
      incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.
    
      Ut enim ad minim veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris
      nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo consequat.
    </body>
    

It looks like two paragraphs of text, and so you might expect it to display in
that way. However, that is not the case, as you can see in the output below:

See the Pen [ no-paragraphs-
example](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/xxrKqeV) by
TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

When the browser encounters new lines like this in your HTML, it will compress
them down into one single space. The result of this compression is that all of
the text is clumped together into one long line.

If we want to create paragraphs in HTML, we need to use the paragraph element,
which will add a new line after each of our paragraphs. A paragraph element is
defined by wrapping text content with a `<p>` tag.

Changing our example from before to use paragraph elements fixes the issue:

See the Pen [ pargraph-
example](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/mdwbmdp) by
TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

### Headings

Headings are different from other HTML text elements: they are displayed
larger and bolder than other text to signify that they are headings.

There are 6 different levels of headings starting from `<h1>` to `<h6>`. The
number within a heading tag represents that heading’s level. The largest and
most important heading is h1, while h6 is the tiniest heading at the lowest
level.

Headings are defined much like paragraphs. For example, to create a h1
heading, we wrap our heading text in a `<h1>` tag.

See the Pen [ html-headings-
example](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/LYLPLbg) by
TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

Using the correct level of heading is important as levels provide a hierarchy
to the content. A h1 heading should always be used for the heading of the
overall page, and the lower level headings should be used as the headings for
content in smaller sections of the page.

### Strong element

The `<strong>` element makes text bold. It also semantically marks text as
important; this affects tools, like screen readers, that users with visual
impairments will rely on to use your website. The tone of voice on some screen
readers will change to communicate the importance of the text within a strong
element. To define a strong element we wrap text content in a `<strong>` tag.

You can use strong on its own:

See the Pen [ html-single-strong-
example](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/qBjWXrB) by
TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

But you will probably find yourself using the strong element much more in
combination with other text elements, like this:

See the Pen [ html-strong-with-paragraph-
exmample](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/wvewqJr) by
TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

Sometimes you will want to make text bold without giving it an important
meaning. You’ll learn how to do that in the CSS lessons later in the
curriculum.

### Em element

The `<em>` element makes text italic. It also semantically places emphasis on
the text, which again may affect things like screen readers. To define an
emphasised element we wrap text content in a `<em>` tag.

To use `<em>` on its own:

See the Pen [ html-single-em-
example](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/wvewqpp) by
TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

Again, like the strong element, you will find yourself mostly using the `<em>`
element with other text elements:

See the Pen [ html-em-with-paragraph-
example](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/VwWZzyj) by
TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

### Nesting and indentation

You may have noticed that in all the examples in this lesson we indent any
elements that are within other elements. This is known as nesting elements.

When we nest elements within other elements, we create a parent and child
relationship between them. The nested elements are the children and the
element they are nested within is the parent.

In the following example, the body element is the parent and the paragraph is
the child:

See the Pen [ html-nesting-parent-
child](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/oNwjEvO) by
TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

Just as in human relationships, HTML parent elements can have many children.
Elements at the same level of nesting are considered to be siblings.

For example, the two paragraphs in the following code are siblings, since they
are both children of the body tag and are at the same level of nesting as each
other:

See the Pen [ html-nesting-
siblings](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/ZEybrYx) by
TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

We use indentation to make the level of nesting clear and readable for
ourselves and other developers who will work with our HTML in the future. It
is recommended to indent any child elements by two spaces.

The parent, child, and sibling relationships between elements will become much
more important later when we start styling our HTML with CSS and adding
behavior with JavaScript. For now, however, it is just important to know the
distinction between how elements are related and the terminology used to
describe their relationships.

### HTML comments

HTML comments are not visible to the browser; they allow us to _comment_ on
our code so that other developers or our future selves can read them and get
some context about something that might not be clear in the code.

Writing an HTML comment is simple: We just enclose the comment with `<!--` and
`-->` tags. For example:

See the Pen [ html-comments-
example](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/abwoyBg) by
TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

**VSCode keyboard shortcut**

If you find typing out the comments syntax tiring, the following shortcut will
help you quickly create a new comment, convert any line to a comment, or
uncomment any line:

  * Mac Users: `Cmd` \+ `/`
  * Windows and Linux Users: `Ctrl` \+ `/`

### Assignment

  1. Watch Kevin Powell’s [HTML Paragraph and Headings Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yqcd-XkxZNM&list=PL4-IK0AVhVjM0xE0K2uZRvsM7LkIhsPT-&index=3)
  2. Watch Kevin Powell’s [HTML Bold and Italic Text Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gW6cBZLUk6M&list=PL4-IK0AVhVjM0xE0K2uZRvsM7LkIhsPT-&index=4)
  3. To get some practice working with text in HTML, create a plain blog article page which uses different headings, uses paragraphs, and has some text in the paragraphs bolded and italicized. You can use [Lorem Ipsum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lorem_ipsum) to generate dummy text, in place of real text as you build your sites. VS Code includes a shortcut to generate lorem ipsum for you. To trigger the shortcut, type `lorem` on the line where you want the dummy text, then press the `Enter` key, and voila, you have generated dummy text without a hitch.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * How do you create a paragraph in HTML?
  * How do you create a heading in HTML?
  * How many different levels of headings are there and what is the difference between them?
  * What element should you use to make text bold and important?
  * What element should you use to make text italicized to add emphasis to it?
  * What relationship does an element have with any nested elements within it?
  * What relationship do two elements have if they are at the same level of nesting?
  * How do you create HTML comments?

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [The semantic difference between <strong> and <b> or <em> and <i> tags and when to use them.](https://medium.com/@zac_heisey/when-to-use-strong-b-em-and-i-tags-in-your-markup-fa4d0af8affb)
  * [An interactive HTML text formatting article](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html_formatting.asp)

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/foundations/html_css/html-
foundations/working-with-text.md) [ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-working-
with-
text&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Working+with+Text%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-lists)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

