Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  Introduction to HTML and CSS

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

So here it is: it’s time to actually start _making things_. This section will
teach you the basics of HTML and CSS, the two foundational building blocks of
pretty much everything on the web.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * Get a basic overview of HTML, CSS and how they work together.

### HTML and CSS

HTML and CSS are two languages that work together to create everything that
you see when you look at something on the internet. HTML is the raw data that
a webpage is built out of. All the text, links, cards, lists, and buttons are
created in HTML. CSS is what adds _style_ to those plain elements. HTML puts
information on a webpage, and CSS positions that information, gives it color,
changes the font, and makes it look great!

Many great resources out there keep referring to HTML and CSS as _programming
languages_ , but if you want to get technical, labeling them as such is not
quite accurate, because they are only concerned with presenting information.
They are not used to program any logic. JavaScript, which you will be learning
in the next section, is a programming language because it’s used to make
webpages do things. Yet, there is quite a lot you can do with just HTML and
CSS, and you will definitely need them both. The following lessons focus on
giving you the tools you need to be successful once you get to the JavaScript
content as you continue through our curriculum!

### Assignment

  1. Read [HTML vs CSS vs JavaScript](https://brytdesigns.com/html-css-javascript-whats-the-difference/). It’s a quick overview of the relationship between HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * [What do HTML and CSS stand for?](https://brytdesigns.com/html-css-javascript-whats-the-difference/#What_is_HTML)
  * Between HTML and CSS, which would you use for putting paragraphs of text on a webpage?
  * Between HTML and CSS, which would you use for changing the font and background color of a button?
  * [What is the difference between HTML, CSS and JavaScript?](https://brytdesigns.com/html-css-javascript-whats-the-difference/)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [This FreeCodeCamp article](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/html-css-and-javascript-explained-for-beginners/) goes into a little more depth than the assigned one. It covers things we’ll be teaching explicitly in later lessons though, so don’t worry about memorizing any of the details.

  * Bookmark [DevDocs.io](https://devdocs.io). Read the “Welcome” message. Massive API documentation collection that even works offline. An essential collection of reference material for everything covered and more. (Maintained by [FreeCodeCamp](https://freecodecamp.org))

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/foundations/html_css/html-
foundations/intro-to-html-css.md) [ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-
introduction-to-html-and-
css&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Introduction+to+HTML+and+CSS%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-elements-and-tags)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

