Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![JavaScript](/assets/badge-
javascript-626af7075a7914bc4f30bd941268ed883785c3fb29b3e9d023eb5ab6450353bb.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/javascript)

#  A Quick Review

[

##  JavaScript Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/javascript)

### Introduction

This course assumes that you have a decent grasp on the fundamentals of
JavaScript. If you just finished our [Foundations
course](https://theodinproject.com/paths/foundations) then you should skip
this review and move on to the next lesson. If it’s been a while and you’re
coming from the Ruby courses, you will probably want to take a day or two to
refresh yourself on the basics.

### Review

Running through “part 1” of [MDN’s JavaScript basics
course](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-
US/docs/Learn/Getting_started_with_the_web/JavaScript_basics) is a great idea
for a refresher on the syntax. If you just want a quick reference to skim, try
[LearnXinY](https://learnxinyminutes.com/docs/javascript/).

It might also be a good idea to do a little practicing before moving on. If
you want something fresh to work on, now would be a fine time to do some
coding exercises from across the net. The following sites are all great places
to look.

  * [Exercism](http://exercism.org/)
  * [CodeWars](https://www.codewars.com/)
  * [w3schools](https://www.w3schools.com/js/default.asp)

### jQuery?

Before you press on, a note about jQuery. We occasionally get questions about
why we don’t include jQuery in our curriculum. jQuery was very popular in the
past, but has fallen out of the limelight in recent years. One of the biggest
reasons it has begun to fall out of favor is that you simply don’t _need_ it
anymore. When it became popular, doing things like DOM manipulation and AJAX
calls were difficult in plain JavaScript, but that is no longer the case.

A quick web-search on the topic will be more useful than any explanations
here, and if you still want to learn it (many older codebases still use it,
and you will see it on many older Stack Overflow posts) we are confident that
you can pick it up quite easily by reading the documentation on [their
website](https://jquery.com/).

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/javascript/introduction/a_quick_review.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-javascript-a-
quick-
review&template=suggestion.yaml&title=A+Quick+Review%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/javascript) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-javascript-
organizing-your-javascript-code-introduction)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

