Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![JavaScript](/assets/badge-
javascript-626af7075a7914bc4f30bd941268ed883785c3fb29b3e9d023eb5ab6450353bb.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/javascript)

#  OOP Principles

[

##  JavaScript Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/javascript)

### Introduction

By this point, you will have learned and had a chance to practice the most
common object-creation and organization patterns in JavaScript. But that is
just the _tip_ of the iceberg. More important than learning the syntax for
factory functions or modules is figuring out how to use them effectively.

This whole series of lessons has been about the “Object Oriented Programming”
paradigm (OOP). The basics of creating objects and classes are relatively
straightforward. But it is not straightforward to decide what to put in each
object, or when to make a new object, or when to let an object ‘inherit’ from
another one.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * Explain the “Single Responsibility Principle”.
  * Briefly explain the additional SOLID principles.
  * Explain what “tightly coupled” objects are and why we want to avoid them.

Luckily there are several concepts and principles that can guide us into
making good decisions when it comes to our objects. This lesson is an
introduction to the most important of those concepts. Keep in mind that there
is not usually a very clear answer to your application design questions. Some
patterns and ideas are obviously better than others, but there is often some
trade-off when deciding where to put a specific function. In other words…
these principles are not _rules_ \- they’re helpful guidelines.

As you read these resources, it might help to go back to some projects you’ve
already done and think about how what you’ve written measures up to the
examples you see. And of course, as you move on, keep these things in mind
when crafting new projects.

### Single responsibility

As you craft your objects, one of the most important things to remember is the
**Single Responsibility Principle** which states that a class (or object or
module… you get the point) should only have _one_ responsibility. This doesn’t
mean that an object can only do one thing, but it does mean that everything an
object does should be part of one responsibility.

Here’s a really common example. Most of our code has functions to update and
write things to the DOM in addition to our application logic. It’s a _really_
good idea to separate your DOM stuff from the application logic.

Here we have a function that should check if a game over condition has been
met. There are two issues with this:

    
    
    function isGameOver() {
    
      // game over logic goes here!
    
      if (gameOver) {
        const gameOverDiv = document.createElement('div');
        gameOverDiv.classList.add('game-over');
        gameOverDiv.textContent = `${this.winner} won the game!`;
        document.body.appendChild(gameOverDiv);
      }
    }
    

The first issue is that the function (and the module it’s in) should not
directly be the one to manipulate the DOM. You should extract all the DOM
manipulation into its own module and use it like so:

    
    
    function isGameOver() {
    
      // game over logic goes here!
    
      if (gameOver){
        DOMStuff.gameOver(this.winner);
      }
    }
    

The second issue remaining is that the `isGameOver` function should only be
responsible for checking if the `gameOver` condition is met. Based on
`isGameOver` return value, the function that handles the game loop should be
responsible for deciding whether to call `DOMStuff.gameOver(this.winner)` or
not.

Another way to think about the Single Responsibility Principle is that a given
method/class/component should have a single reason to change. Otherwise, if an
object is trying to have multiple responsibilities, changing one aspect might
affect another.

The Single Responsibility Principle is the first of a commonly found set of 5
design principles called the **SOLID** principles. You will read more about
these principles in the assignment articles below.

### Loosely coupled objects

Obviously, all of our objects are intended to work together to form our final
application. You should take care, however, to make sure that your individual
objects can stand alone as much as possible. **Tightly coupled** objects are
objects that rely so heavily on each other that removing or changing one will
mean that you have to completely change another one - a real bummer.

This one is related pretty strongly to ‘Single Responsibility’ but takes a
different angle. As an example, if we were writing a game and wanted to
completely change how the User Interface worked, we should be able to do that
without completely reworking the game logic. So we should be able to start off
writing our game using primarily `console.log()`s and then add in a bunch of
`DOM` functions later without touching the game logic.

### Assignment

  1. The following article mentions the acronym **SOLID** before going on to talk about Single Responsibility. Single Responsibility is definitely the most relevant of the 5. Feel free to dig into the rest of the SOLID principles if you like, but pay special attention to Single Responsibility. 
    1. [SOLID principle #1: Single responsibility (JavaScript)](https://duncan-mcardle.medium.com/solid-principle-1-single-responsibility-javascript-5d9ce2c6f4a5) has links to other very brief articles that cover the rest of ‘SOLID’. They’re optional, but recommended nonetheless. **Note** : this article riffs off what the SOLID videos in the next link goes in-depth on.
    2. Watch [The SOLID Design Principles by WDS](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLZlA0Gpn_vH9kocFX7R7BAe_CvvOCO_p9) to see code examples for each principle.
  2. [How to Write Highly Scalable and Maintainable JavaScript: Coupling](https://web.archive.org/web/20200810210808/https://medium.com/@alexcastrounis/how-to-write-highly-scalable-and-maintainable-javascript-coupling-c860787dbdd4) explains loosely coupled objects pretty well.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * Explain the “Single Responsibility Principle”.
  * [Briefly explain the additional SOLID principles.](https://medium.com/@cramirez92/s-o-l-i-d-the-first-5-priciples-of-object-oriented-design-with-javascript-790f6ac9b9fa)
  * [Explain what “tightly coupled” objects are and why we want to avoid them.](https://web.archive.org/web/20200810210808/https://medium.com/@alexcastrounis/how-to-write-highly-scalable-and-maintainable-javascript-coupling-c860787dbdd4)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * The best book we’ve ever read on the subject of loose coupling is [Practical Object-Oriented Design In Ruby](http://www.poodr.com/). Unfortunately, it is not free… and not JavaScript. We feel confident in recommending it anyway. If you don’t know Ruby, it is a clear enough language that you don’t really need to learn it to follow the examples and the content of the book is sincerely fantastic. Alternatively, [99 Bottles of OOP](https://sandimetz.com/products) is written in both JavaScript and Ruby. It is written by the same author and may be a better option if you are brand new to OOP (it is not free either).

  * [Building a house from the inside out](https://www.ayweb.dev/blog/building-a-house-from-the-inside-out) will walk you through the process of separating your core logic and DOM logic.

  * This [brief video by Coderized](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q1qKv5TBaOA) covers the SOLID programming principles and more, within the context of embracing clean coding practices and establishing a maintainable code structure. You may find it helpful if you are still confused about why these principles exist and how they can work together to improve your code, code architecture, and your skills as a programmer!

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/javascript/organizing_your_javascript_code/oop_principles.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-javascript-
oop-
principles&template=suggestion.yaml&title=OOP+Principles%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/javascript) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-javascript-todo-list)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

