Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Intermediate HTML and CSS](/assets/badge-html-
css-91bc8d9c7ebb2e2f73eeb302c38a92d9ba6f182301dbd1868d7198fcc8376aeb.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/intermediate-html-and-css)

#  More CSS Properties

[

##  Intermediate HTML and CSS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/intermediate-html-and-css)

### Introduction

By now, you probably have a strong grasp of the important foundational
concepts of CSS, but there is a lot more that you can do with CSS to make some
truly spectacular looking websites. It’s time to cover those useful little CSS
features you can use to add some shine to your projects.

There are a _lot_ of CSS properties. [A Recent CSS Tricks
Article](https://css-tricks.com/how-many-css-properties-are-there/) says there
are _hundreds_. Luckily, you don’t have to memorize them all: the amount of
properties you’re actually going to use on a daily basis is much smaller. This
lesson is going to cover most of the items you’ll end up using on a regular
basis. The format of this lesson is a little different since it’s essentially
just a list of CSS properties. We’ll give a little description of the property
and then link you to some documentation where you can see all the available
options.

### Learning outcomes

  * You’ll learn about a lot of useful CSS properties!

#### Background

You’ve likely already experimented with setting background colors on things,
but the `background` property can do quite a bit more. The `background`
property is actually a shorthand for 8 different background-related
properties, all of which you can read about in the linked docs. Beyond
changing background-colors, you can also specify background images, change the
position and size of background images, and change how background images
repeat or tile if they are too small to fill their container. It is also
possible to have multiple background layers.

One thing to note is that it _is_ possible to use these properties
individually, and in some cases it might be easier and more clear to do that
than defaulting to the shorthand. This is in contrast to some other shorthand
properties where it is almost always preferable to default to using the
shorthand (flex, margin, padding etc.)

There’s a lot of information in the docs on this shorthand and all the
associated properties. As we’ve mentioned before, you do NOT need to
_memorize_ the exact order and syntax of each property. It’s enough to know
that they exist and have a general idea of what they do.

One more note, the **Formal Syntax** section here is _crazy_. Don’t let it
deter you. The basic syntax is somewhat hard to define because many of the
properties that make up the shorthand are optional, or can come in different
places in the definition. Read the [MDN docs on
`background`.](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/background)

#### Borders

At this point, you’ve probably already encountered `border` and `border-
radius`. The `border` property is another shorthand, but it is _much_ less
complicated than the background shorthand. For borders, basically you just
need to define a size, style and color.

`border-radius` is the property that is used to create rounded corners on
things. As you’ll see in the docs, it’s possible to get fancy and define
different radii for each corner of an element, but this is rarely useful.
Store that information in the category of “things I’ll look up if I ever need
it”.

Read the MDN docs for [`border`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-
US/docs/Web/CSS/border) and [`border-
radius`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/border-radius).

#### box-shadow

As you might expect from the property name, `box-shadow` adds a shadow effect
around an element. This is useful to create a sense of depth on your page and
to add subtle separation between elements.

In usage it’s pretty simple, but keep in mind that it’s best used sparingly,
and subtly. Prefer lighter, barely visible shadows to darker or brighter
colors.

Read the [`box-shadow` docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-
US/docs/Web/CSS/box-shadow).

#### Overflow

It is possible, using `overflow`, to define what happens to an element when
its content is too big to fit. The most common usage is likely to add
scrollbars to an element inside a webpage, for example a `card` style element
with scrollable content.

Check out the [`overflow` docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-
US/docs/Web/CSS/overflow).

#### Opacity

Opacity is another easy one that can be very useful in some circumstances.

Check out [`opacity`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-
US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity) for a definition and some examples.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * Which property would you use to make an element transparent?
  * Which property would you use to make a background image tile?
  * Which property would you use to add scrollbars to an element?
  * Which property would you use to add a shadow behind an element?
  * Which property would you use to create rounded corners on an element?
  * [How would you use border-radius to make a circular element?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/border-radius)

### Additional resources

Throughout this lesson we have linked primarily to the MDN docs for each
property… however there are _many_ useful reference sites across the web that
can be useful and that may show up when searching these items.

  * [CSS Tricks](https://css-tricks.com/almanac/properties) has some really great content. Some of it feels less formal and official than the MDN docs, but that means they can be easier to digest. Sometimes their examples can be more useful. For example, check out their pages on the [background shorthand](https://css-tricks.com/almanac/properties/b/background/), or [overflow](https://css-tricks.com/almanac/properties/o/overflow).
  * [W3 Schools](https://www.w3schools.com/cssref/) is another fine resource. We (the Odin authors) tend to prefer MDN, but there is nothing wrong with W3.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/intermediate_html_css/intermediate_css_concepts/more_css_properties.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-intermediate-
html-and-css-more-css-
properties&template=suggestion.yaml&title=More+CSS+Properties%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/intermediate-html-and-css) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/node-path-intermediate-html-and-css-advanced-selectors)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

