Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Getting Hired](/assets/badge-getting-
hired-03b3463749a1cd7dd5358c585b0c35c2878bbde91aa0800f641992eeb69f7c66.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-hired)

#  Strategy

[

##  Getting Hired Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-
hired)

### Introduction

The first step is to have a strategy. You’ve come this far with a deliberate
and strategic approach to learning, why abandon it at the most important
phase? Getting a job can itself be a full-time job so use your time wisely and
plan ahead. There are some things you can and should do ahead of time, which
we will cover in greater depth below.

The path to working takes the following form:

  1. Figure out your needs and skills
  2. Figure out what companies need and offer
  3. Increase your odds by laying the groundwork early
  4. Collect job leads
  5. Qualify job leads
  6. Reach out and apply
  7. Interview
  8. Handle the offer(s)
  9. Profit??

You’ll notice that it’s quite structured. Some things are more optional than
others, but you’ve got to have a plan or you’ll find yourself spamming your
resume out to every job post on every job board and wondering why you haven’t
had any success. Or maybe you’ll end up going through a long and painful
process and realizing you never wanted that job anyway – a total waste of
time.

We’ll also cover some alternate paths you can take like finishing up your
education at a coding bootcamp and how you can contribute to open source
projects (like this one) to boost your “real world” experience.

### Assignment

A fantastic place to start your “getting hired” journey is this **[very
thorough article from Happy Bear Software on How to Get A Programmer
Job](https://web.archive.org/web/20160925155912/http://www.happybearsoftware.com/how-
to-get-a-programmer-job.html)**.

Now get your head out of the clouds, stop dreaming about how you’ll get hired,
and actually do it!

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [Getting your first IT job from InformationWeek](https://www.informationweek.com/team-building-and-staffing/how-to-land-your-first-it-job)
  * [Engineer’s Guide to US Visas](http://blog.sourcing.io/visa-guide)
  * [Lessons from a Silicon Valley Job Search by Robert Heaton](https://robertheaton.com/2014/03/07/lessons-from-a-silicon-valley-job-search/)

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/getting_hired/preparing_for_job_search/strategy.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-getting-hired-
strategy&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Strategy%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/getting-hired) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-getting-hired-it-
starts-with-you)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

