Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  Project: Etch-a-Sketch

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

In this project, you’ll be creating a pretty neat toy to flex your DOM
manipulation skills. You’re going to build a browser version of something
between a sketchpad and an Etch-A-Sketch.

This project should _not_ be easy for you. You’ll probably have to Google
frequently to get the right JavaScript methods and CSS to use – in fact,
that’s the point! You _can_ build this using the tools that you have already
learned, and there are plenty of resources on the net for learning stuff that
we haven’t covered yet if you decide you need it. We’ll walk you through the
basic steps, but it will be up to you to actually implement them.

If you get totally stuck, drop by the
[chatroom](https://discord.com/channels/505093832157691914). Someone will be
there to point you in the right direction.

### Assignment

Don’t forget to commit early & often! You can [reference the Commit Message
lesson
here](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations/lessons/commit-
messages)!

  1. [Follow the instructions atop Odin’s Recipes project](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations/lessons/recipes#setting-up-your-projects-github-repository) to set up a Git repository for this project.
  2. Create a webpage with a 16x16 grid of square divs. 
    * Create the divs using JavaScript. Don’t try making them by hand with copy and pasting in your HTML file!
    * It’s best to put your grid squares inside another “container” div (which can go directly in your HTML).
    * Use flexbox to make the divs appear as a grid (versus just one on each line). Despite the name, do not be tempted to research/use CSS Grid for this as Grid will be taught later after the foundations course. This is an opportunity specifically to get more practice in for flexbox!
    * Be careful with borders and margins, as they can adjust the size of the squares!
    * “OMG, why isn’t my grid being created???” 
      * Did you link your CSS stylesheet?
      * Open your browser’s developer tools.
      * Check if there are any errors in the JavaScript console.
      * Check your “elements” pane to see if the elements have actually shown up but are somehow hidden.
      * Go willy-nilly and add `console.log` statements in your JavaScript to see if it’s actually being loaded.
  3. Set up a “hover” effect so that the grid divs change color when your mouse passes over them, leaving a (pixelated) trail through your grid like a pen would. 
    * Hint: “Hovering” is what happens when your mouse enters a div and ends when your mouse leaves it. You can set up event listeners for either of those events as a starting point.
    * There are multiple ways to change the color of the divs, including: 
      * adding a new class to the div.
      * changing the div’s background color using JavaScript.
  4. Add a button to the top of the screen that will send the user a popup asking for the number of squares per side for the new grid. Once entered, the existing grid should be removed and a new grid should be generated _in the same total space as before_ (e.g. 960px wide) so that you’ve got a new sketch pad. **Tip** : Set the limit for the user input to a maximum of 100. A larger number of squares results in more computer resources being used, potentially causing delays, freezing, or crashing that we want to prevent. 
    * Research `button` tags in HTML and how you can make a JavaScript function run when one is clicked.
    * Also check out `prompt`s.
    * You should be able to enter `64` and have a brand new 64x64 grid pop up without changing the total amount of pixels used.
  5. Push your project to GitHub!

#### Extra credit

Transform the behavior of a square when interacting with the mouse by
introducing a series of modifications.

  1. Rather than a simple color change from black to white, each interaction should randomize the square’s RGB value entirely.
  2. Additionally, implement a progressive darkening effect where each interaction adds 10% more black or color to the square. The objective is to achieve a completely black square only after ten interactions.

You can choose to do either one or both of these challenges, it’s up to you.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/foundations/javascript_basics/project_etch_a_sketch.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-etch-a-
sketch&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Etch-a-
Sketch%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

Only logged in users can view user submissions for this project

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-fundamentals-part-5)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

