Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

# Frequently Asked Questions

##  Who is The Odin Project for?

    

The Odin Project is for absolute beginners in the world of web development and
those who have tried other resources without success. In reality, The Odin
Project is for anyone who wants to work as a web developer, do freelancing
work, build a startup, or just hack together a homepage for yourself. All the
tools you need are here. **You should consider yourself fairly competent with
personal computers and open to using a non-Windows based Operating System.**

We've built an in-depth curriculum designed to take you 100% of the way to
becoming a web developer. Many other resources out there teach you just the
basics of programming. With The Odin Project, you'll create your own websites,
games, and social media sites.

The curriculum has also been designed in a modular fashion, making skimming
through lessons a breeze.

##  What is the goal of The Odin Project?

    

The goal of The Odin Project is to provide a complete path for students to go
from zero programming knowledge to employed as web developers while working
with other students and picking up the skills to become self sufficient along
the way.

##  How long does The Odin Project take?

    

We won't have any of this 'Learn it all in two days!' BS. You can't start from
scratch and learn true web development in such a short period of time and you
know it. It's highly unlikely that you'll be employable after a weekend
workshop or a one-month part-time course.

On the other hand, you don't necessarily need to put in 4 years getting a
computer science degree. 80% of what they cover won't be used during a typical
web developer's early career and it's not necessary to get hired. So why not
learn the 20% and learn the rest while you're getting paid on the job?

We've essentially distilled down what you most need to learn to hit that
employable level, but it's still a healthy dose of learning. There is no good
way to estimate how long it will take you to reach that point, and we don't
have any good way of getting data on how long it takes on average anyways. If
you're naturally more technical or come from a technical background, it may be
a bit faster. If you're less technical or brand new to all this, it will take
longer. Don't despair! When you think about it, that's pretty much the same
learning curve you had to climb to learn anything worthwhile so far in life.

##  Which technologies can one expect to learn from The Odin Project?

    

All students are initially enrolled into the [Foundations
Course](courses/foundations). This will give you a chance to explore several
of the languages and technologies you'll need to know on your journey to
becoming a web developer. Foundations introduces HTML, CSS, JavaScript, Git
and more. We've also created mini-projects that give you a chance to test your
new knowledge by building your own applications and websites! Once Foundations
is complete, students have two paths to choose from: [Fullstack Ruby on
Rails](paths/full-stack-ruby-on-rails) and [Fullstack JavaScript](paths/full-
stack-javascript)

The Full Stack Ruby on Rails path takes a back-to-front approach to fullstack
development. We start with a [strong foundation in Ruby](/paths/full-stack-
ruby-on-rails/courses/ruby) and an understanding of databases before migrating
into [Ruby on Rails](courses/ruby-on-rails) (which is a framework built using
Ruby). Then you'll polish your front-end skills with a journey into [HTML and
CSS](courses/html-and-css) before learning to make your websites flow, load
quickly and look great with [JavaScript](courses/javascript).

The Full Stack Javascript path maintains our front-end momentum from
Foundations by delving into [Javascript.](courses/javascript) Once you've got
a solid foundation here, you'll take a deeper look at front-end design with
[HTML and CSS](courses/html-and-css) before taking your JavaScript skills to
the server-side with Express and MongoDB in [NodeJS](courses/nodejs).

Along the way in either path you'll learn Git and deployment so you can build
your own portfolio, collaborate with others, and see your work on the web.
Finally, The Odin Project will provide you with opportunities to work with
legacy codebases and open-source projects. We'll also cover areas specifically
intended to help when you're [looking for employment](paths/full-stack-ruby-
on-rails/courses/getting-hired).

##  How is The Odin Project different from other programs?

    

The Odin Project is different from other online programs in that it pulls the
best resources from around the web and compiles them to create a complete
curriculum. In many other programs the material is formatted to meet their
specific curriculum. This means that not all of the lessons are top-notch. The
Odin Project sidesteps this downfall by pulling various free resources from
around the web and compiles them in one place.

The Odin Project also attempts to develop your problem solving skills when it
requires you to install programs on your local computer. As developers,
programming errors frequently arise and knowing how to decipher error messages
is critical. These problem solving skills are frequently ignored by other
programs.

Lastly, The Odin Project is project based. Other programs require you to
simply input the correct answer. It is difficult to retain any knowledge by
learning the bare minimum syntax. The Odin Project is designed with projects
built from the ground up giving you real-world experience that you can use to
build your portfolio and get hired as a web developer!

##  Who is "Odin"?

    

Odin is a figure from Norse mythology, the allfather of the gods. He is
portrayed as powerful and fickle (as they often are) but also wise and
cunning. His search for knowledge is a thing of legends - he [gave his eye for
the wisdom of ages](http://norse-mythology.org/tales/why-odin-is-one-eyed) and
hung from the world tree, pierced by his own spear, for nine days and nights
to [gain the knowledge of runes](http://norse-mythology.org/tales/odins-
discovery-of-the-runes/).

Learning web development is not an easy task and the tools laid out here are
merely the path; you must walk it yourself. Should you possess a thirst for
knowledge and persistence of spirit akin to that storied in Odin's mythos, you
will find success on your journey.

##  Where do I sign up?

    

You don't have to! Dive right in, the content is free and available. It'd be
best if you started at the beginning and went through in order but everyone's
goals are different so we made the full curriculum available if you want to
cherry-pick lessons or projects.

However, by [signing up](/sign_up) you are able to check off completed
projects and lessons, easily keeping track of your progress. We don't collect
any user data and keep emails to a minimum.

##  Is The Odin Project free?

    

Yes! The Odin Project is an open-source project created and maintained by
[hard working volunteers](/team). To find out how you can help us, please
visit our how to [contribute page](/contributing).

##  Will I get a certificate on completion of the course?

    

We don't provide a certificate for course completion. Employers will be much
more impressed with your amazing personal portfolio of projects, many of which
you'll hopefully have built with inspiration from The Odin Project.

##  Do you have a Code of Conduct?

    

You can read our [Code of Conduct on
GitHub](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/.github/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

##  Can I use this curriculum to teach?

    

The Odin Project is licensed under two pieces: the curriculum and the main
website. The main website is a fully open-source project [under an MIT
license](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/theodinproject/blob/main/license.txt),
so you can use the code for whatever you want. The curriculum is currently
licensed under a [Creative Commons
license](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/blob/main/license.md)
which restricts it to noncommercial use without prior authorization.

This means you can use The Odin Project's curriculum to teach at your club,
meetup, or with your friends (In fact, we'd love it if you did that and told
us how it went!). You can't, however, use it to start a bootcamp without
having a conversation first. Please reach out with any questions to
[theodinprojectcontact@gmail.com](mailto: theodinprojectcontact@gmail.com)

##  How can I get in touch?

    

If you have questions about The Odin Project itself, feel free to [contact
us](mailto:theodinprojectcontact@gmail.com). There is also a friendly Odin
community in our [Discord chat rooms.](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

## Have a question?

Chat with our friendly Odin community in our Discord server!

[Open Discord](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

