Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![NodeJS](/assets/badge-
nodejs-1432a58382afd13f5bf55d4e5eda07244a3aa5fae9cee98ea034f17d6a09d503.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

#  Debugging Node

[

##  NodeJS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

### Introduction

Up until this point, you’ve likely only relied on the browser’s DevTools to
debug your code. When it comes to debugging Node and server side code, VS Code
has a handy built-in debugger that you can use to debug directly in your
editor! Additionally, you can also set Google Chrome up to debug Node and get
the full benefits of the Chrome DevTools.  Ultimately, this lesson will
familiarize you with the Node debugger, which is a critical tool at this point
in your learning, and will likely be a key tool you use daily in your
professional life.

### Learning outcomes

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to do the following:

  * Use the VS Code built-in Node debugger
  * Use the Chrome DevTools to debug Node

### Assignment

  * Watch [this video tutorial about Node.js debugging in VS Code](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2oFKNL7vYV8&ab_channel=VisualStudioCode) to see the process in action.
  * Check out the official [VS Code Node debugger documentation](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/nodejs/nodejs-debugging). Take note of the Javascript Debug Terminal- this is an easy way to get the debugger running!
  * Read [this article](https://www.section.io/engineering-education/debug-node-devtools/) for a tutorial on how to debug Node with Chrome. NOTE: You can ignore anything that refers to debugging remote apps- you’ll be debugging local apps.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * What are two ways to debug Node?

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/nodeJS/introduction_to_nodeJS/debugging_node.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnodejs-debugging-
node&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Debugging+Node%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/nodejs) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/nodejs-basic-informational-
site)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

