Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![JavaScript](/assets/badge-
javascript-626af7075a7914bc4f30bd941268ed883785c3fb29b3e9d023eb5ab6450353bb.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/javascript)

#  Project: Weather App

[

##  JavaScript Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/javascript)

### Introduction

Use everything we’ve been discussing to create a weather forecast site using
the weather API from the previous lesson. You should be able to search for a
specific location and toggle displaying the data in Fahrenheit or Celsius.

You should change the look of the page based on the data, maybe by changing
the color of the background or by adding images that describe the weather.
(You could even use the Giphy API to find appropriate weather-related gifs and
display them). Feel free to use promises or async/await in your code, though
you should try to become comfortable with both.

#### WeatherAPI free tier

After creating your API key from WeatherAPI, you will automatically be moved
to the free tier after 14 days. This will limit the forecast data available to
you to 3 days. You may want to keep this in mind while making design choices
for the forecast display.

### API keys, secrets, and security

Not all APIs are free, and depending on how they’re set up, they can cost
money per use. This makes them a prime target for people looking to use the
API without paying by using **your** API key. They can also be rate-limited,
and if someone has access to your API key they can use up all of your uses.
One way to prevent this issue is to store your API keys on the server and
never send them to the frontend in the first place, this is often done using
environment variables and it makes the key available only on the server the
code is deployed to.

When talking about API keys and security you’ll often hear “Never trust the
client” (client meaning the frontend). Often this means not to trust that data
coming _from_ the client is valid, but it also means that you cannot trust
anything we send _to_ the client. Because of this, when you leak an API key,
Github will alert you that you have committed an API key publicly. After
following this project, and indeed exposing the API key, you may notice that
Github will send you this alert. This is totally OK for this project as this
API key is publicly available and there is no consequence for exposing it.
This is not to say ALL keys are this way. Later during the backend courses you
will learn ways to securely deal with these topics.

### Assignment

  1. Set up a blank HTML document with the appropriate links to your JavaScript and CSS files.
  2. Write the functions that hit the API. You’re going to want functions that can take a location and return the weather data for that location. For now, just `console.log()` the information.
  3. Write the functions that _process_ the JSON data you’re getting from the API and return an object with only the data you require for your app.
  4. Set up a simple form that will let users input their location and will fetch the weather info (still just `console.log()` it).
  5. Display the information on your webpage!
  6. Add any styling you like!
  7. Optional: add a ‘loading’ component that displays from the time the form is submitted until the information comes back from the API. Use DevTools to test for low-end devices.
  8. Push that baby to github and share your solution below!

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/javascript/asynchronous_javascript_and_apis/project_weather_app.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-javascript-
weather-
app&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Weather+App%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

Only logged in users can view user submissions for this project

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/javascript) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/javascript-a-very-brief-intro-
to-cs)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

