Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Advanced HTML and CSS](/assets/badge-html-
css-91bc8d9c7ebb2e2f73eeb302c38a92d9ba6f182301dbd1868d7198fcc8376aeb.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/advanced-html-and-css)

#  Introduction to Web Accessibility

[

##  Advanced HTML and CSS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/advanced-
html-and-css)

### Introduction

At this point in the curriculum you’ve learned incredibly valuable concepts in
whichever full stack path you chose, you’ve created some awesome, resume
worthy projects, and you should have a better understanding of some HTML and
CSS concepts. One could even argue that you may now love working with CSS…?

What you may not have too much an understanding of, though, is the topic of
accessibility, often referred to as “a11y” (due to there being 11 letters
between the first and last letters). Unfortunately, this is a topic that many
people either don’t know much about, or just don’t take into account when
developing websites. If you fit into either of those two categories, you may
have adopted some habits that aren’t exactly a11y friendly. Before we get into
how you can break away from such habits and begin implementing a11y friendly
concepts, it’s important to first understand some basic information about web
accessibility.

### Learning outcomes

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to:

  * Explain what web accessibility is.

### What is web accessibility?

Web accessibility means that websites, tools, and technologies are designed
and developed so that people with disabilities and other circumstantial
limitations can use them with as few barriers as possible.

There are different types of disabilities, including (but not limited to)
auditory, physical/motor, cognitive, or visual. A disability can be permanent,
such as a user who is completely blind or deaf, or it can be temporary, such
as a user with a broken arm. Users can have multiple disabilities at any given
time. Older users with changing abilities may even have similar conditions as
those who have a disability.

Situational limitations are a little different. Using a phone outside on a
bright day, browsing a site with one hand while you’re busy doing something
else with the other, or living in an area where the internet is slow or the
bandwidth is expensive are all examples of situational limitations. These
limitations, unlike a disability, occur to users only in specific situations,
but are still important to keep in mind when developing a website.

### Why web accessibility matters

Let’s first look at a non-web example to gain a little perspective. Imagine
being in a multi-storied building that has no elevator. For some people, this
might only be an annoyance. “Huh, no elevator. I guess I’ll walk up a few
flights of stairs, then.” A person that requires a wheelchair, however, would
find it impossible, or at the very least much more difficult, to go anywhere
beyond the first floor. Even if a person in a wheelchair had someone to lift
the wheelchair up each step, it would be a much more difficult process. The
point here is that an elevator would have made this building more accessible.

The building is your website, and the elevator is a collection of various
accessibility features and tools (…it’s a pretty big elevator). When you
develop a website, you’re developing it for users, and you need that website
to actually be _usable_ by them. People with disabilities, older people with
changing abilities, people who aren’t as tech savvy, and people with some sort
of situational limitation are still users, and websites should be as equally
usable by them as possible.

One other pretty big reason that accessibility matters is that, depending on
the country, there could actually be laws _requiring_ accessibility to be
implemented.

### Assignment

  1. Go through [Diverse Abilities and Barriers](https://www.w3.org/WAI/people-use-web/abilities-barriers/) to get a better understanding of how some users with disabilities are affected by inaccessible sites.
  2. Watch the videos on [Web Accessibility Perspectives](https://www.w3.org/WAI/perspective-videos/) to see how (and which) users can benefit from accessibility features. Each video is pretty short and has audio descriptions and transcripts. If you prefer, the page also has a link to a compiled version of all of the videos on YouTube.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * What is web accessibility?
  * Who truly benefits from accessibility features?

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [The Business Case for Digital Accessibility](https://www.w3.org/WAI/business-case/) goes over reasons for implementing accessibility beyond just being more inclusive to more users.
  * [How People with Disabilities Access Digital Content](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lu7a5RU5lM0) is a rather long video (a whopping 45 minutes), but it goes over a lot of various assistive technologies and will offer you some more perspective on how users with disabilities may browse the websites you create.
  * [When we design for disability, we all benefit](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g2m97gPI70I) is a video featuring Elise Roy that furthers the point mentioned in this lesson, that accessibility benefits everyone. While this video is a more general overview that doesn’t revolve around web development specifically, it can still be an eye-opening experience.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/advanced_html_css/accessibility/introduction_to_web_accessibility.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-advanced-html-
and-css-introduction-to-web-
accessibility&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Introduction+to+Web+Accessibility%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/advanced-html-and-css) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/node-path-advanced-html-and-css-the-web-content-accessibility-
guidelines-wcag)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

