Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Ruby](/assets/badge-
ruby-d91c1849066ed424531394e9d693dd99aaef49bcee15a96f462a1ae54c359af0.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-rails/courses/ruby)

#  Project: Connect Four

[

##  Ruby Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-rails/courses/ruby)

### Warmup: time traveling

A good way to get familiar with and begin contributing to a new project is to
write tests for it. It’s also the best way to become familiar with a new code
base, something you’ll have to do when you start working. It’s pretty common
for test code to ultimately take up twice as many lines of code as the actual
project code!

You still may feel shaky on RSpec at this point (which is totally normal), so
let’s go back in time and write tests for some of the code you’ve already done
to build up a bit of muscle memory. If you’ve written a good batch, submit
them below and we’ll include them as part of the original project description
to help future students!

### Assignment 1

  1. Go back to the [Caesar Cipher Project](/lessons/ruby-caesar-cipher) and write tests for your code. It shouldn’t take more than a half-dozen tests to cover all the possible cases. As always, use the git workflow you learned in [this foundations lesson](https://www.theodinproject.com/lessons/foundations-revisiting-rock-paper-scissors) to work on a new feature so you can work on your new code without fear.
  2. Clone [this repo](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/ruby_testing) and complete the lessons in the spec folder.
  3. Write tests for your [Tic Tac Toe project](/lessons/ruby-tic-tac-toe). In this situation, it’s not quite as simple as just coming up with inputs and making sure the method returns the correct thing. You’ll need to make sure the tests that determine victory or loss conditions are correctly assessed. 
    1. Start by writing tests to make sure players win when they should, e.g. when the board reads X X X across the top row, your `#game_over` method (or its equivalent) should trigger.
    2. Test each of your critical methods to make sure they function properly and handle edge cases.
    3. Use mocks/doubles to isolate methods to make sure that they’re sending back the right outputs.

### Project: TDD Connect Four

Hopefully everyone has played Connect Four at some point (if not, see the
[Wikipedia page](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Connect_Four)). It’s a basic
game where each player takes turns dropping pieces into the cage. Players win
if they manage to get 4 of their pieces consecutively in a row, column, or
along a diagonal.

The game rules are fairly straightforward and you’ll be building it on the
command line like you did with the other games. If you want to spice up your
game pieces, look up the [unicode miscellaneous
symbols](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Unicode_characters#Miscellaneous_Symbols).
The Ruby part of this should be well within your capability by now so it
shouldn’t tax you much to think about it.

The major difference here is that you’ll be doing this TDD-style. So figure
out what needs to happen, write a (failing) test for it, then write the code
to make that test pass, then see if there’s anything you can do to refactor
your code and make it better.

Only write exactly enough code to make your test pass. Oftentimes, you’ll end
up having to write two tests in order to make a method do anything useful.
That’s okay here. It may feel a bit like overkill, but that’s the point of the
exercise. Your thoughts will probably be something like “Okay, I need to make
this thing happen. How do I test it? Okay, wrote the test, how do I code it
into Ruby? Okay, wrote the Ruby, how can I make this better?” You’ll find
yourself spending a fair bit of time Googling and trying to figure out exactly
how to test a particular bit of functionality. That’s also okay… You’re really
learning RSpec here, not Ruby, and it takes some getting used to.

### Assignment 2

  1. Build Connect Four! Just be sure to keep it TDD.

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [RSpec Mock example SO question](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/3622604/rspec-mock-object-example)
  * [Helpful video from Sandi Metz](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=URSWYvyc42M)
  * [Tutorials Point RSpec Writing Specs](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/rspec/rspec_writing_specs.htm)

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/ruby/testing_ruby_with_rspec/project_connect_four.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fruby-connect-
four&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Connect+Four%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

Only logged in users can view user submissions for this project

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-
rails/courses/ruby) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to
next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/ruby-ruby-final-project)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

