Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Advanced HTML and CSS](/assets/badge-html-
css-91bc8d9c7ebb2e2f73eeb302c38a92d9ba6f182301dbd1868d7198fcc8376aeb.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/advanced-html-and-css)

#  WAI-ARIA

[

##  Advanced HTML and CSS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/advanced-
html-and-css)

### Introduction

In the previous lessons, you learned several ways to make websites more
accessible. Those lessons, however, were just the tip of the accessible
iceberg. WAI-ARIA introduces attributes that can help make websites even more
accessible by modifying the semantics and context of elements, which can give
you greater control over how those elements are perceived by assistive
technologies. Because this subject can get so complicated, we’re only going to
cover two attributes that you can get _a lot_ of use from.

### Learning outcomes

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to:

  * Know the purpose of WAI-ARIA.
  * Know what ARIA can’t do.
  * Understand the five rules of ARIA use.
  * Understand what the accessibility tree is.
  * Understand the three ARIA attributes that can add labels to elements.
  * Understand what the `aria-hidden` attribute does.

### What is WAI-ARIA?

WAI-ARIA stands for - _deep breath_ \- the Web Accessibility Initiative’s
Accessible Rich Internet Applications specification. The purpose of WAI-ARIA
(often referred to as just ARIA) is to define a way to make web content more
accessible when native HTML is unable to do so. Think of ARIA as something
that fills in the accessible gaps left by native HTML.

It’s important to note that ARIA can only modify the semantics or context of
an element. ARIA _can’t_ :

  * modify an element’s appearance,
  * modify an element’s behavior,
  * add focusability, or
  * add keyboard event handling.

When you use ARIA, you will usually have to take additional steps to add in
any missing semantics or functionality. Remember the Keyboard Navigation
lesson and how we had to add in functionality to `<div>` “buttons”?

#### The five rules of ARIA

ARIA can be extremely powerful when used correctly, but it can be equally as
dangerous when used incorrectly. Because of this, you should keep in mind that
**no ARIA is better than bad ARIA** , even when you have the best intentions.
The WCAG has something called “The five rules of ARIA,” which as you may have
guessed are rules you should follow when using ARIA. Although we don’t cover
all of the terms mentioned below, it’s still important to understand the rules
themselves, especially if you decide to dive deeper into ARIA on your own.

  1. Always use native HTML elements and attributes over ARIA when possible.

  2. Never change native semantics, unless you have no other choice.

  3. All interactive ARIA controls must be usable with a keyboard.

  4. Never use `role='presentation'` or `aria-hidden='true'` on focusable elements.

  5. All interactive elements must have an accessible name.

### The accessibility tree

Before we get into a couple of the ARIA attributes available to us, it’s
important to know some basics of what the accessibility tree is, as it will
help you understand just what those attributes are actually doing.

The accessibility tree is based on the DOM, something you should be very
familiar with by now. While the DOM represents nodes and objects that make up
a web page, the accessibility tree contains only the accessibility related
information that will be used by assistive technologies. The way ARIA works is
by modifying properties of the objects that make up this accessibility tree.
For this lesson, we’re only going to focus on two of these properties:

  * **Name** : Also known as the “accessible name”, this is what assistive technologies announce to a user and what separates elements of the same type from one another. The name may be set by one or more native labels, including the text contents of an element, the `<label>` element, or the `alt` attribute, to name a few.
  * **Description** : This is what assistive technologies announce in addition to its accessible name.

### ARIA labels

ARIA labels help users of assistive technologies better understand the content
on a web page by overriding native labels or providing additional descriptive
text. Unlike the `<label>` element, ARIA labels aren’t limited to being used
on only a select few elements, though they still have their own limitations.

You may remember being warned against using the `id` attribute earlier in the
curriculum. To briefly recap, normally you want to avoid overusing `id`
attributes or even using it when it isn’t necessary (which more often than
not, it isn’t, and you should stick with using classes). There are several
ARIA attributes, however, that actually _require_ another element to have an
`id`.

When using such ARIA attributes, you would provide an `id` to one element, and
you would then pass in that `id` value as another element’s ARIA attribute
value. This creates a link between the elements, similar to how a `<label>`
element’s `for` attribute creates a link to an input’s `id`. Of the three
types of ARIA labels mentioned below, both `aria-labelledby` and `aria-
describedby` are two of the ARIA attributes that require another element to be
given an `id`.

#### `aria-label`

The `aria-label` attribute overrides any native label of an element and
modifies its name property in the accessibility tree. It is best used when an
element doesn’t already have a native label. When added, the string value of
the `aria-label` attribute becomes the element’s accessible name. **However**
, [`aria-label` does not have any effect on some HTML
elements](https://github.com/w3c/aria/issues/756), such as `<div>` or a
`<span>`.

A common use for `aria-label` can be found in the “close” buttons of menus or
modals:

    
    
    <button type='button' aria-label='Close menu'>X</button>
    

Instead of a screen reader announcing, “X, button”, which makes little sense
to the user, it would announce, “Close menu, button”. Another way you could
use `aria-label` is on landmark elements (our [Semantic
HTML](https://www.theodinproject.com/lessons/node-path-advanced-html-and-css-
semantic-html) lesson gets another shoutout… again!):

    
    
    <nav aria-label='main navigation'>...</nav>
    

Once a screen reader reaches the above HTML, it would announce “Main
navigation, navigation landmark”. If you had multiple navigation elements on a
page, you could give each a different `aria-label` value in order to separate
them from one another, making them more understandable for screen reader
users. Pretty neat, huh?

**Do not** use `aria-label` to change how a word is phonetically announced.
Certain words may not get announced correctly by a screen reader, and you may
have a temptation to try and fix this. You may end up fixing how a word is
announced by a screen reader, but that “fix” could end up making no sense when
announced by other assistive technologies like a
[braille](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Braille) reader.

#### `aria-labelledby`

The `aria-labelledby` attribute overrides both the native label and the `aria-
label` attribute. `aria-labelledby` changes an element’s accessible name
(created by `aria-labelledby`) to a concatenated string of the text contents
or `alt` attributes of the labeling elements (the ones whose `id` are passed
in).

The great thing about `aria-labelledby` is that not only can you pass in any
number of `id` references, but you can also have an element reference itself.
Keep in mind that you can’t pass in the same reference multiple times, because
any subsequent references after the first will be ignored.

    
    
    <!-- Here's the labelling element -->
    <h2 id='label'>Shirts</h2>
    
    <!-- And here's the labelled element. Note the order of the ID references passed in -->
    <button type='button' id='shop-btn' aria-labelledby='label shop-btn'>Shop Now</button>
    

The HTML above would be announced by a screen reader as, “Shirts, shop now,
button”. This can make multiple “shop now” buttons on a page unique from one
another and thus provide additional context, making the page more
understandable.

Another great thing about `aria-labelledby` is that even if a labeling element
is visually hidden, either by the `hidden` HTML attribute or with CSS, it will
still modify the accessible name of the labeled element. This can be useful if
you want to label an element for users of assistive technologies, but you
don’t want that element’s label (or labels) to be visible to sighted users.

Although it may work somewhat similarly to the native `<label>` element,
`aria-labelledby` does not have the same event handling by default. This is
functionality you would have to add in yourself via JavaScript.

    
    
    <!-- Clicking the <label> element gives focus to the input element -->
    <label for='name'>Name:</label>
    <input id='name' type='text' />
    
    <!-- Clicking the <div> element won't give focus to the input element -->
    <div id='label'>Name:</div>
    <input type='text' aria-labelledby='label' />
    

#### `aria-describedby`

The `aria-describedby` attribute modifies the description property in the
accessibility tree. Similar to the `aria-labelledby` attribute, when you use
this attribute you pass in the `id` values of other elements as the `aria-
describedby` value, and the elements whose `id` value are passed in can also
be visually hidden.

    
    
    <label>Password:
      <input type='password' aria-describedby='password-requirements' />
    </label>
    
    <!-- Meaningful text + ARIA! -->
    <span id='password-requirements'>Password must be at least 10 characters long.</span>
    

When the `<input>` element receives focus, a screen reader would announce,
“Password, edit protected, password must be at least ten characters long.”
This immediately notifies a screen reader user of any requirements for the
password they want to choose, any time the input receives focus.

### Hiding content from the accessibility tree

Similar to how you can visually hide elements with the `hidden` HTML attribute
or the `display` and `visibility` CSS properties, you can use the `aria-
hidden` attribute to hide certain elements, such as decorative images and
icons, from the accessibility tree. The difference with `aria-hidden`,
however, is that the element will remain visible to sighted users. This can be
especially useful when you want to add an icon inside of another element. For
example, if we were to use Material Icons inside of a button:

    
    
    <!-- Example 1 -->
    <button type='button'>
      <span class='material-icons'>add</span>
      Add Book
    </button>
    
    <!-- Example 2 -->
    <button type='button'>
      <span class='material-icons' aria-hidden='true'>add</span>
      Add Book
    </button>
    

While both of the above examples would look visually identical, the button in
Example 1 would be announced by a screen reader as, “Add add book, button”.
The text content of the `<span>` and the text content of the button itself are
concatenated as the accessible name of the button. The button in Example 2,
however, hides the `<span>` from the accessibility tree so its text content
_isn’t_ added to the button’s accessible name, meaning a screen reader would
correctly announce “Add book, button”.

Be careful when using this attribute, though. When you give an element `aria-
hidden='true'`, all children of that element will also become hidden to the
accessibility tree. Adding `aria-hidden='false'` to a child element won’t have
any effect if one of its parents still has `aria-hidden='true'`, either.

You should also be careful not to give an element `aria-hidden='true'` if it
is focusable. Doing so would cause nothing to be announced when the element
receives focus, which would confuse users that use a screen reader and
navigate the page via a keyboard.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * What purpose does WAI-ARIA serve?
  * What are the four things ARIA can’t do?
  * What are the five rules of ARIA?
  * What is the accessibility tree?
  * What are the differences between the three ARIA labels?
  * What does the `aria-hidden` attribute do?

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [An in-depth guide to ARIA roles](https://www.a11yproject.com/posts/2020-08-20-an-indepth-guide-to-aria-roles/#landmark-roles) goes over an ARIA attribute that alters the semantics of elements, which can allow you to create custom inputs, buttons, and more. Just keep in mind rule number one of the ARIA rules!
  * [ARIA live regions](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/ARIA_Live_Regions) are another type of ARIA attribute that are incredibly useful for having dynamic updates made to a page announced by assistive technologies. A word of warning if you decide to dive into this topic: the `assertive` live region may not work in the JAWS and NVDA screen readers, but the `role="alert"` attribute, which has an implicit live region of assertive, should.
  * [ARIA, Accessibility APIs and coding like you give a damn](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qdB8SRhqvFc) is a 30-minute video that covers some concepts introduced in the previous lesson, the importance of ARIA attributes, and an example of how to add functionality to a custom ARIA button.
  * [Accessibility Fundamentals with Rob Dodson](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z8xUCzToff8&list=PLOKfJQCx03akpT6vQQCd6o3_iWWVDIjLK&index=6) is another 30-minute video that covers some things mentioned in the previous lessons, but it also covers the accessibility tree, ARIA, and if you still need to be convinced, why using semantic HTML is important.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/advanced_html_css/accessibility/wai_aria.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-advanced-html-
and-css-wai-aria&template=suggestion.yaml&title=WAI-
ARIA%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/advanced-html-and-css) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/node-path-advanced-html-and-css-accessibility-auditing)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

