Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Intermediate HTML and CSS](/assets/badge-html-
css-91bc8d9c7ebb2e2f73eeb302c38a92d9ba6f182301dbd1868d7198fcc8376aeb.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/intermediate-html-and-css)

#  Emmet

[

##  Intermediate HTML and CSS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/intermediate-html-and-css)

### Introduction

Emmet is a plugin, built into VS Code, that helps you write HTML and CSS more
efficiently by providing a bunch of clever shortcuts. By now, you have written
a good amount of HTML and CSS, and if you have been using VS Code there’s a
big chance that you have already encountered Emmet in some way.

### Learning outcomes

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to do the following:

  * Use some of Emmet’s most useful shortcuts.
  * Set up custom Emmet keybindings in VS Code.

### Emmet

Emmet is a really useful tool for anyone that works a lot with HTML and CSS.
Luckily, Emmet does not have that big of a learning curve, and if you already
know how to write HTML and CSS you’ll have no trouble picking up Emmet
abbreviations.

Let’s start off by generating an HTML boilerplate with Emmet. Opening up an
empty html file in VS Code and entering `!` should trigger Emmet suggestions
like so:

[![Triggering
Emmet](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/1953c1f219a8b321e7ecef9ebcb92834f50ffb9f/html_css/intermediate_html/emmet/imgs/00.png)](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/1953c1f219a8b321e7ecef9ebcb92834f50ffb9f/html_css/intermediate_html/emmet/imgs/00.png)

Pressing `Enter` should generate the following text:

[![Generating boilerplate
HTML](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/1953c1f219a8b321e7ecef9ebcb92834f50ffb9f/html_css/intermediate_html/emmet/imgs/01.png)](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/1953c1f219a8b321e7ecef9ebcb92834f50ffb9f/html_css/intermediate_html/emmet/imgs/01.png)

We have just used one of many Emmet abbreviations. There are lots of useful
Emmet abbreviations that you should check out, like [Wrap with
Abbreviation](https://docs.emmet.io/actions/wrap-with-abbreviation/) and
[Remove Tag](https://docs.emmet.io/actions/remove-tag/). Definitely go through
those before moving forward.

Considering how useful these two are, we will be setting up VS Code shortcuts
for them. Start off by opening the keyboard shortcuts window. You can do so by
clicking the cog icon on the bottom left and selecting keyboard shortcuts, or
by pressing `Cmd` \+ `K` followed by `Cmd` \+ `S`.

[![Setting up VS code
shortcuts](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/1953c1f219a8b321e7ecef9ebcb92834f50ffb9f/html_css/intermediate_html/emmet/imgs/02.png)](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/1953c1f219a8b321e7ecef9ebcb92834f50ffb9f/html_css/intermediate_html/emmet/imgs/02.png)

After entering the keyboard shortcuts window, you should be able to access all
of the Emmet actions by searching for `Emmet:<action>`. In our case, it will
be `Emmet:Wrap With Abbreviation`

[![Emmet
actions](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/1953c1f219a8b321e7ecef9ebcb92834f50ffb9f/html_css/intermediate_html/emmet/imgs/03.png)](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/1953c1f219a8b321e7ecef9ebcb92834f50ffb9f/html_css/intermediate_html/emmet/imgs/03.png)

You can now add a shortcut to it by clicking the plus sign and entering
whichever key combination you would like for that specific action. You can do
the same for `Remove Tag` by searching for `Emmet:Remove tag`.

### Assignment

  1. [This](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V8vizNQKtx0) is a good video on Emmet. Go ahead and watch it up to `11:37` as it demonstrates some content we haven’t covered yet. We’ll get there eventually.
  2. Take a look at the [Emmet cheat sheet](https://docs.emmet.io/cheat-sheet/). You don’t have to memorize it, but it’s good that you get familiar with the different ways it can be used.
  3. Go through the [Emmet documentation](https://docs.emmet.io/). Once again, no need to memorize everything but it would be good if you played around with all the different possibilities.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * Why should you use Emmet?
  * What are some useful Emmet abbreviations?
  * [What syntax would you use to create this element `<p class="text"></p>`?](https://docs.emmet.io/cheat-sheet/)
  * [What syntax expands to an element with a child element inside of it? For example: `<div><p></p></div>`](https://docs.emmet.io/cheat-sheet/)
  * [What syntax would you use to create three elements that have the same class name?](https://docs.emmet.io/cheat-sheet/)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [Emmet Keybindings](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=agutierrezr.emmet-keybindings) by [Andrés Gutiérrez](https://agutierrezr.github.io/), is a set of Emmet keybinds for Visual Studio Code. It can be used as a pre-defined group of keybinds, in case you don’t know what to map to which keys.

  * [Emmet Live](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ysemeniuk.emmet-live) by [Yurii Semeniuk](https://github.com/semeniuk), is another extension in Visual Studio Code. It can continually generate the corresponding HTML structure while you’re editing Emmet abbreviations. For the desired outcome, try selecting a random piece of text before calling out this extension.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/intermediate_html_css/intermediate_html_concepts/emmet.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-intermediate-
html-and-css-
emmet&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Emmet%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/intermediate-html-and-css) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/node-path-intermediate-html-and-css-svg)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

