Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  The Box Model

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

Now that you understand the basic syntax of HTML and CSS, we’re going to get
serious. The most important skills you need to master with CSS are
_positioning_ and _layout_. Changing fonts and colors is a crucial skill, but
being able to put things exactly where you want them on a webpage is even more
crucial. After all, how many webpages can you find where absolutely every
element is just stacked one on top of another?

Learning to position elements on a webpage is not that difficult once you
understand just a few key concepts. Unfortunately, many learners race through
learning HTML and CSS to get to JavaScript and end up missing these
fundamental concepts. This leads to frustration, pain, ([and funny
gifs](https://giphy.com/gifs/css-13FrpeVH09Zrb2)) because all the JavaScript
skills in the world are meaningless if you can’t stick your elements on the
page where you need them to be. So with that in mind, let’s get started.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * You’ll learn all about _the box model_.
  * You’ll learn how to make sure elements are just the right size with `margin`, `padding`, and `borders`.

### The box model

The first important concept that you need to understand to be successful in
CSS is the box model. It isn’t complicated, but skipping over it now would
cause you much frustration down the line.

Every single thing on a webpage is a rectangular box. These boxes can have
other boxes in them and can sit alongside one another. You can get a rough
idea of how this works by sticking a border on every item on the page like
this:

    
    
    * {
      border: 2px solid red;
    }
    

[![boxes](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/main/foundations/html_css/css-
foundations/the-box-
model/imgs/boxes.png)](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/main/foundations/html_css/css-
foundations/the-box-model/imgs/boxes.png)

You can use the browser’s inspector to add the CSS above to this web page if
you want. Boxes in boxes!

[![lines](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/main/foundations/html_css/css-
foundations/the-box-model/imgs/odin-
lined.png)](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/main/foundations/html_css/css-
foundations/the-box-model/imgs/odin-lined.png)

OK, so there might be some circles in the above image… but when it comes to
layout, they fit together like rectangular boxes and not circles. In the end,
laying out a webpage and positioning all its elements is deciding how you are
going to nest and stack these boxes.

The only real complication here is that there are many ways to manipulate the
size of these boxes, and the space between them, using `padding`, `margin`,
and `border`. The assigned articles go into more depth on this concept, but to
sum it up briefly:

  * `padding` increases the space between the border of a box and the content of the box.
  * `margin` increases the space between the borders of a box and the borders of adjacent boxes.
  * `border` adds space (even if it’s only a pixel or two) between the margin and the padding.

Be sure to study the diagrams carefully.

[![the box
model](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/main/foundations/html_css/css-
foundations/the-box-model/imgs/box-
model.png)](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/main/foundations/html_css/css-
foundations/the-box-model/imgs/box-model.png)

### Assignment

  1. [This video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rIO5326FgPE) is a straightforward overview of the box model, padding and margin. Go ahead and watch this now; it informs everything else.
  2. Because the box model concept is so incredibly fundamental, let’s dig a bit deeper with [this lesson from MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Building_blocks/The_box_model). It covers the same material as the video above and will introduce you to inline boxes that we will explore in the next lesson. Pay close attention to the examples and take the time to experiment with their in-browser editor!
  3. [This CSS Tricks page](https://css-tricks.com/almanac/properties/m/margin/) has some further information about the `margin` property that you’ll find useful. Specifically, the sections about `auto` and margin collapsing contain things you’ll want to know.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * From inside to outside, what is the order of box-model properties?
  * [What does the `box-sizing` CSS property do?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Building_blocks/The_box_model#the_alternative_css_box_model)
  * [What is the difference between the standard and alternative box model?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Building_blocks/The_box_model#the_alternative_css_box_model)
  * [Would you use `margin` or `padding` to create more space between 2 elements?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Building_blocks/The_box_model#margins_padding_and_borders)
  * [Would you use `margin` or `padding` to create more space between the contents of an element and its border?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Building_blocks/The_box_model#margins_padding_and_borders)
  * [Would you use `margin` or `padding` if you wanted two elements to overlap each other?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Building_blocks/The_box_model#margins_padding_and_borders)
  * [How do you set the alternative box model for all of your elements?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Building_blocks/The_box_model#the_alternative_css_box_model)
  * [How do you center an element horizontally?](https://css-tricks.com/almanac/properties/m/margin/#aa-auto-and-centering)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * For a more interactive explanation and example, try this [Scrim on the box model](https://scrimba.com/scrim/cof3d488184abe24ec6258ab4).

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/foundations/html_css/css-
foundations/the-box-model.md) [ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-the-box-
model&template=suggestion.yaml&title=The+Box+Model%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-block-and-inline)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

