Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Getting Hired](/assets/badge-getting-
hired-03b3463749a1cd7dd5358c585b0c35c2878bbde91aa0800f641992eeb69f7c66.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-hired)

#  Collecting Job Leads

[

##  Getting Hired Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-
hired)

### Introduction

You’ve moved beyond the preparation and knowledge gathering phase. Now it’s
time to hit the pavement and approach the actual jobs.

Organization is key here and a spreadsheet is highly recommended. Keep track
of not just the jobs themselves, but also their websites, any connections you
have to the company, and a log of your activity. Have a separate column for
each “Must Have” criteria you identified in the earlier section (use a binary
`true`/`false`) and each of the top 5 “Nice To Have” criteria (use a 3- or
5-point system) so you can quickly check off where the jobs rank.

Put any job opening you find into your spreadsheet.

#### Here’s an example of how a spreadsheet to keep track of job openings
might look like:

Job Title | Company | Website | Connections | Activity Log | Must Have 1 |
Must Have 2 | Must Have 3 | Nice to Have 1 | Nice to Have 2 | Nice to Have 3 |
Nice to Have 4 | Nice to Have 5  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Job 1 | Company A | www.companyA.com | John (LinkedIn) | Sent resume on
04/01/2023 | TRUE | TRUE | FALSE | 5 | 4 | 3 | 2 | 1  
Job 2 | Company B | www.companyB.com | Jane (Referral) | Followed up on
04/02/2023 | TRUE | FALSE | TRUE | 3 | 5 | 2 | 4 | 1  
Job 3 | Company C | www.companyC.com | N/A | Applied online on 04/03/2023 |
FALSE | TRUE | TRUE | 4 | 2 | 5 | 1 | 3  
  
### The best places to look

Start with your network, even if it’s small. Reach out to your Facebook
friends and friends-of-friends to see if anyone’s hiring. You should start
your search with the highest probability / highest quality sources first:

  1. Your network (including people you’ve met in the community)
  2. Direct postings that go to a human (like when developers [not recruiters] send emails about job opening at their company to the local Ruby list). It’s important to have another human being on the other end of the emails.
  3. Direct postings (like on a company website for a specific position). These will also usually go to a specific human being.
  4. Job boards (pretty much awful, you’re in the herd now)

Try checking out these links for job boards. The more technically-focused, the
better:

  * [Authentic Jobs](http://www.authenticjobs.com)
  * [CWJobs](http://cwjobs.co.uk)
  * [White Truffle – Weighted towards startups right now](http://www.whitetruffle.com)
  * [Dice.com](http://www.dice.com)
  * [Coderwall.com](http://coderwall.com) lets you display your engineering prowess and they can come to you.
  * [Join-Startups](https://underdog.io/) \- open startup jobs in a dozen cities
  * [Work-At-A-Startup](https://www.workatastartup.com/) \- Y-Combinator Startups
  * [Hubstaff-Talent](https://talent.hubstaff.com/) \- for freelancers and remote

### On recruiters

There are a lot of recruiters out there whose job it is to get you hired, but
you’ll need to be careful about how you work with them. For starters, they get
paid based on a percentage of the salary you take, so their incentive is to
get you paid as much as possible (which is good). Unfortunately as a junior
developer your salary is much lower than a senior engineer so you will not be
their priority and they won’t spend much time on you (which is bad).

If you’re approached out of the cold as a junior developer by a recruiter,
chances are that they won’t be going out of their way to learn your story and
find you the right fit – you’re more likely to get put in the pile of resumes
they send out to everyone. You probably don’t yet have work experience that is
salable enough for them to go out of their way to find you the right position.
In that case, you may find them sending out your resume to everyone just in
hopes that they get their 20-30%. Remember – if they approached you in a
spammy way (e.g. through LinkedIn), they probably do the same to companies so
it’s doubtful they’ll add value to you.

As you become more senior and your work is more unique, recruiters can add a
lot of value to your career by understanding the potential market for you and
opening doors you may not otherwise have found (so don’t get down on them
yet!). As a junior, you’re unfortunately more of a commodity, so you probably
won’t find value in working with recruiters yet. Rely on your own ability to
hustle and sell yourself.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/getting_hired/applying_and_interviewing/collect_leads.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-getting-hired-
collecting-job-
leads&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Collecting+Job+Leads%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/getting-hired) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-getting-hired-
qualifying-job-leads)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

