Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Advanced HTML and CSS](/assets/badge-html-
css-91bc8d9c7ebb2e2f73eeb302c38a92d9ba6f182301dbd1868d7198fcc8376aeb.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/advanced-html-and-css)

#  Responsive Images

[

##  Advanced HTML and CSS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/advanced-
html-and-css)

### Introduction

Images require special care on responsive websites. This lesson presents a few
issues that arise when working with responsive images and the options you have
when dealing with them.

### Learning outcomes

  * You’ll learn how to make your images behave properly when resizing them with CSS.
  * You’ll learn how to serve up different images based on screen size.

### The basics

The most basic problem you are going to face when working with responsive
images is the aspect ratio or the relationship between width and height. If
you shrink the width of an image on smaller screens and do not manipulate the
height, the image will appear distorted!

The solution to this issue is incredibly easy, and we’ve already mentioned it
in an earlier lesson: simply don’t define both a width and a height. If an
image is given a flexible width, and the height is set to `auto`, then it
should retain its aspect ratio correctly.

### background-size, background-position and object-fit

What if you don’t want your image to simply shrink (in both height and width)?
`background-size` and `object-fit` are two properties that can provide a
little more flexibility (pun intended) with how aspect ratios are handled.

`background-position` and `background-size` are properties that work on
elements with a background image, and do not work on normal `img` tags. You’ll
see some examples and specifics in the reading assignment later, but you can
get quite a lot of control over the display and placement of background images
by working with these properties. For example, `background-position: center`
will make sure the image is always centered in its container, even if the
container is too small to fit the whole image. `background-size: cover` will
resize the image so that it is always completely filling its container while
cropping as little as possible.

Here’s a little demo you can play with:

See the Pen [ background | CSS
Responsiveness](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/powxJXV) by
TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

`object-fit` works similarly, but is meant for `img` tags. With the `object-
fit` property you _can_ specify a width and height for your images and then
tell an image how it is supposed to fit itself to those dimensions. The
default value for `object-fit` is `fill`, which simply stretches the image to
fit the dimensions, but much like `background-size` you can also tell it to
`cover` or `contain` the image.

Here’s a demo of `object-fit` on an image. Open this one up on CodePen and
resize the browser to see how the image reacts.

See the Pen [ object-
fit](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/NWgOGGX) by TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

### Even more control!

It is also possible to literally use _different_ images for different screen
sizes. This gives you the most control over exactly how your images are
displayed at various resolutions. For example, instead of just trusting
`object-fit` to keep the subject of a photograph in a frame, you could present
a cropped version of it on smaller screens. There are two ways of achieving
this, but the most flexible is using the `<picture>` tag, which you’ll learn
more about in the assignment.

### Assignment

  1. First check out the docs for [background-size](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/background-size), [background-position](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/background-position), and [object-fit](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/object-fit). The demos on those pages should make their usage clear.
  2. MDN’s [Responsive Images](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Multimedia_and_embedding/Responsive_images) is an introduction to serving up responsive images in HTML.
  3. CSS Tricks’s [Guide to the Responsive Images Syntax in HTML](https://css-tricks.com/a-guide-to-the-responsive-images-syntax-in-html/) is a great article that goes into more depth on how to actually implement responsive images.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * What is the main difference between `object-fit` and `background-size`?
  * How can you define a width and a height on an `img` without distorting it?
  * [Why would you want to provide different images at different screen resolutions?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/HTML/Multimedia_and_embedding/Responsive_images#why_responsive_images)
  * [When would you want to use an `img` with a `srcset` vs a `picture`?](https://css-tricks.com/a-guide-to-the-responsive-images-syntax-in-html/)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [Responsive Images 101](https://cloudfour.com/thinks/responsive-images-101-definitions/) is a good series of articles if you need another source.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/advanced_html_css/responsive_design/responsive_images.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-advanced-html-
and-css-responsive-
images&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Responsive+Images%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/advanced-html-and-css) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/node-path-advanced-html-and-css-media-queries)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

