Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![React](/assets/badge-
react-d347c579ca6df9afc0ef4127bb4fe6dc4002be06cb241f4d70b37c412f56cec2.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-rails/courses/react)

#  Using Ruby On Rails For Your Backend

[

##  React Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-rails/courses/react)

### Introduction

So, you’ve now learned a lot of juicy JavaScript, enabling you to make various
components of your HTML/CSS page react to user actions and/or input. That’s
great! As you’ve seen, you can get your apps to do a lot of pretty cool things
already, just using client-side JavaScript. You may have noticed, though, that
there is still an important piece of the puzzle missing: unless you use [Local
Storage](http://coding.smashingmagazine.com/2010/10/11/local-storage-and-how-
to-use-it/), your app ‘forgets’ the user’s preferences, as well as any other
changes made, as soon as the page gets reloaded.

While Local Storage is great, it’s not ideal: it only stores data on the
computer from which the user is accessing the page. This approach does not
allow for the app to ‘remember’ anything when the same user tries to access it
again from a different device. For that, you’re going to need a real backend.

### Learning outcomes

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to:

  * Explain how “unobtrusive JavaScript” works
  * Explain how to pass data from your Rails application to your JavaScript
  * Explain why you should use AJAX to load large batches of data

### Building your own backend with Ruby on Rails

Since you’ve already learned Ruby on Rails in our [full-stack Ruby on Rails
path](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-rails), the next
step is obvious: you get to build your own backend with Rails! In preparation,
reread the [Rails lesson on building an
API](https://www.theodinproject.com/lessons/ruby-on-rails-apis-and-building-
your-own) to refresh how to set up a Rails backend that can handle JSON
requests.

Are you done? Good. Next, it’s time to practice allowing your front end
JavaScript to talk to your Rails backend using AJAX. We’ll cover some best
practices for how to pass data from one to another, but otherwise it’s up to
you: you’ve got everything you need to put together those final pieces of the
web development puzzle.

### Assignment

  1. [Check out “Using JavaScript in your Rails App” from Daniel Kehoe](http://railsapps.github.io/rails-javascript-include-external.html). It is long and covers a lot of ground, but it’s got great content. Some of the stuff on dependencies can be skimmed, but pay attention to the `content_for` stuff at the bottom.

  2. [Refresh yourself on Rails AJAX from RailsGuides](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/v6.1/working_with_javascript_in_rails.html) (just skim the top few sections).

  3. Read [Bootstrapping JSON data into a Rails View](https://web.archive.org/web/20221230234727/https://jfire.io/blog/2012/04/30/how-to-securely-bootstrap-json-in-a-rails-view/) to learn about passing data to your front end.

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [How to Build a fullstack Rails 7 backend with React Frontend](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-set-up-a-ruby-on-rails-v7-project-with-a-react-frontend-on-ubuntu-20-04)
  * [Grabbing your Rails form CSRF token with JavaScript so Rails doesn’t yell at you with “Warning, can’t verify CSRF token authenticity”, via SO](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/7203304/warning-cant-verify-csrf-token-authenticity-rails)
  * [… and another SO post on the CSRF token](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/8503447/rails-how-to-add-csrf-protection-to-forms-created-in-javascript)

### Knowledge check

  * [ How do you load custom JavaScript in a given Rails view page? ](https://railsapps.github.io/rails-javascript-include-external.html#locations)
  * [How does “unobtrusive JavaScript” work?](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/v6.1/working_with_javascript_in_rails.html#unobtrusive-javascript)
  * [How can you pass data from your Rails app to your JavaScript?](https://railsapps.github.io/rails-javascript-include-external.html#parameters)
  * [Why would you want to use AJAX to load large batches of data?](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/v6.1/working_with_javascript_in_rails.html#an-introduction-to-ajax)

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/react/react_and_the_backend/using_ruby_on_rails_for_your_backend.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Freact-new-using-ruby-on-
rails-for-your-
backend&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Using+Ruby+On+Rails+For+Your+Backend%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-
rails/courses/react) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to
next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/react-new-where-s-waldo-a-photo-tagging-
app)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

