Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Ruby](/assets/badge-
ruby-d91c1849066ed424531394e9d693dd99aaef49bcee15a96f462a1ae54c359af0.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-rails/courses/ruby)

#  Object Oriented Programming

[

##  Ruby Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-rails/courses/ruby)

### Introduction

You’ve got the building blocks of Ruby out of the way, great! Now it’s time to
get into the fun stuff… how do we combine those building blocks in the most
efficient and elegant ways to produce the programs we’d like to write?

The concepts you’ll learn here are often less specific to Ruby itself and more
widely applicable to any object-oriented language. That’s because the
fundamental concepts are just that… fundamental. Don’t repeat yourself.
Modularize your code. Have your classes and methods only do one thing. Show as
little of your interfaces to the world as you can. Don’t make methods or
classes heavily dependent on each other. These will take some time and
practice to implement effectively, but you’ll already be taking a big step
towards creating high quality code just by finishing up this section.

There are two projects in this Object Oriented Programming Basics section, but
this does not mean that you will only use OOP for these two projects. Ruby is
a object-oriented language, so it is important to use OOP for all of the
remaining projects.

There is a lot of reading in this lesson, so you are encouraged to code along
with each example. If you find an example that does not make sense, ask for
help in the `#ruby-help` channel in our
[Discord](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) server. To get the most out of each
example, try to apply what you learned by adding similar functionality on your
own.

### Learning outcomes

  * You will learn about classes.
  * You will learn about methods.
  * You will learn about scope.

### Assignment

  1. Read the [Object Oriented Programming with Ruby](https://launchschool.com/books/oo_ruby) online book, by Launch School.
  2. Read through these reinforcing posts by Erik Trautman to help you answer the questions in the “Learning Outcomes” section: 
    * [Ruby Explained: Classes](http://www.eriktrautman.com/posts/ruby-explained-classes)
    * [Ruby Explained: Inheritance and Scope](http://www.eriktrautman.com/posts/ruby-explained-inheritance-and-scope)
  3. Read the article [Object Relationships in Basic Ruby](https://medium.com/@marcellamaki/object-relationships-in-basic-ruby-1af5773fff48) to see an example of how two classes can interact.
  4. Read the [Bastard’s Chapter on Error Handling](http://ruby.bastardsbook.com/chapters/exception-handling/) to reinforce your understanding of dealing with errors.
  5. Do [Quiz #5](http://www.codequizzes.com/ruby/beginner/intro-object-oriented-programming) and [Quiz #7](http://www.codequizzes.com/ruby/beginner/modules-classes-inheritance) from Code Quizzes
  6. Every programming language community develops a style guide to help make code more maintainable and easier to read, therefore it is important to familiarize yourself with the [Ruby Style Guide](https://rubystyle.guide/). 
    * As you can see, there are a lot of guidelines. Instead of trying to remember everything, install [rubocop](https://docs.rubocop.org/rubocop/installation.html), a static code analyzer (linter) and formatter, which is based on this style guide.
    * When it suggests a change that you don’t understand, you can refer to this style guide to understand the reasons behind the rule. You will be inundated with offenses that seem minor, but we encourage you to make the recommended adjustments and trust the wisdom of the Ruby community that developed this style guide. If you feel strongly that you should ignore a particular rule, you can research ways to disable a particular rule or even ignore an entire file.
    * Read the [basic usage](https://docs.rubocop.org/rubocop/usage/basic_usage.html) of rubocop in the terminal.
    * To highlight the rubocop offenses in VSCode, you will need to have the ‘Ruby’ extension installed. In addition, you will need to update your settings.json file with the following lines:

    
    
    "ruby.lint": {
      "rubocop": true,
    },
    

**If the above instructions do not work** , explore the initial configuration
options in the extension’s
[documentation](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=rebornix.Ruby).
Another alternative is to try the [ruby-
rubocop](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=misogi.ruby-
rubocop) extension, but be aware of the potential problems listed in their
documentation.

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to other content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [This video presentation from Kevin Berridge](http://vimeo.com/91672848) covers major themes of practical object-oriented design, with many references to Sandi Metz’s book, in about 40 minutes.
  * If you need a variable refresher, check out [Zetcode’s Variables section](https://zetcode.com/lang/rubytutorial/variables/).
  * If you want more examples to code along with, check out [Zetcode’s OOP section](http://zetcode.com/lang/rubytutorial/oop/) and [Zetcode’s second OOP section](https://zetcode.com/lang/rubytutorial/oop2/) until they start talking about exceptions (~80% of the way down).
  * After you have completed several OOP projects, the following books by Sandi Metz are essential to build on the foundational concepts in this lesson. 
    * [99 Bottles of OOP](https://sandimetz.com/99bottles) is a hands-on workbook that you should code along with to get the most out of it. This is a great resource if you feel uncertain about OOP concepts and would like to guided through refactoring examples and explanations.
    * [Practical Object-Oriented Design in Ruby](https://www.poodr.com/) is a traditional technical book with practical examples. This is a great resource after 99 Bottles or if you already feel like you fully understand OOP concepts.

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson. If you’re having trouble answering the questions below on your own,
review the material above to find the answer.

  * [What is a class?](https://launchschool.com/books/oo_ruby/read/the_object_model#classesdefineobjects)
  * [What are getters and setters?](https://www.eriktrautman.com/posts/ruby-explained-classes)
  * [What is inheritance?](https://www.eriktrautman.com/posts/ruby-explained-classes)
  * [What is a scope?](https://www.eriktrautman.com/posts/ruby-explained-inheritance-and-scope)
  * [When is a new scope defined?](https://www.eriktrautman.com/posts/ruby-explained-inheritance-and-scope)
  * [What is the purpose of instance variables?](https://launchschool.com/books/oo_ruby/read/classes_and_objects_part1#instancevariables)
  * [What is the difference between class variables and instance variables?](https://www.eriktrautman.com/posts/ruby-explained-classes)

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/ruby/object_oriented_programming_basics/object_oriented_programming.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fruby-object-oriented-
programming&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Object+Oriented+Programming%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-ruby-on-
rails/courses/ruby) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to
next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/ruby-tic-tac-toe)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

