Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Getting Hired](/assets/badge-getting-
hired-03b3463749a1cd7dd5358c585b0c35c2878bbde91aa0800f641992eeb69f7c66.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-hired)

#  Qualifying Job Leads

[

##  Getting Hired Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-
hired)

### Introduction

You should have the criteria that you use to evaluate a job already figured
out and it should already be in your spreadsheet. Look through each lead on
your spreadsheet and cross off the ones that fail your “must-have” criteria,
then rank them based on your “nice-to-have” criteria. You should be able to
easily come up with a weighting system that lets you sort the jobs in order of
preference. Simpler is better, so no need to go overboard.

Next, make a column for the percentage likelihood of getting the job with a
reasonable effort. Multiply this with the value of the job based on the
previous step, sort by this new “expected value”, and you should have an
indication of which jobs are most worth your time.

If the job happens to be with one of the many companies like Revature that
offer to train you for free before contracting you out, read this [Hire Beware
blog post](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/blog/blob/main/hire-beware.md) to
learn more about these less-than-ideal opportunities. Part of the reason for
qualifying the leads is to make sure you don’t get sucked into a process and
waste a bunch of time applying to jobs that you wouldn’t actually take anyway.
That’s surprisingly easy. You’ll still be able to send out “practice”
applications, but at least now you know which companies are worth sending
those out to.

Some other criteria to think about in the “nice-to-have” column:

  * How easily can I continue to learn at that job?
  * Is there access to mentors and teaching?
  * How good are my peers who I can learn from?
  * How much would I like going into work each day?
  * What are the job-security risks of the job? Corporations aren’t lock-tight just because they’re big… they go through restructuring phases and lay off people with little good reason.
  * Does it pay well enough to support me?
  * Does its location fit the needs of me and my family?
  * How long do I want this (first) job for?

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/getting_hired/applying_and_interviewing/qualify_leads.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-getting-hired-
qualifying-job-
leads&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Qualifying+Job+Leads%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/getting-hired) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-getting-hired-
building-your-resume)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

