Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Getting Hired](/assets/badge-getting-
hired-03b3463749a1cd7dd5358c585b0c35c2878bbde91aa0800f641992eeb69f7c66.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-hired)

#  What Companies Want

[

##  Getting Hired Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-
hired)

### Introduction

Now that you’ve figured your own situation out, the fact is that you can’t get
hired by just thinking about why _you_ need or deserve the job. You have to
think about things from the perspective of the company. Why are they
interested in hiring you? What, therefore, will they look for?

### Life behind the curtain

Hiring managers are busy people. That’s why they need someone new… to remove
some of their workload and get their team working better or faster. They also
have to deal with potentially hundreds of unqualified applicants every week,
which takes up too much of their valuable time. They just want to get back to
building stuff and not have to hire again anytime soon. So they are looking
for someone who can **add value as soon as possible** and who will be able to
**grow with the organization.**

The second characteristic, growth, is something you shouldn’t have much
trouble selling if you’ve come this far and learned web development on your
own. The key is to present yourself as a growth curve, not just a static line
(i.e. you’ll continue learning and improving very rapidly and not stop). You
have real career goals and you’ve learned incredibly fast so far to get to
where you are (right?).

The first part, adding value immediately, is more difficult – that’s where
they want to see that you’ve had relevant experience before and can meet their
technical bar. There’s a bit of a catch-22 with getting hired – the easiest
way to show you are employable is to have been employed before. It’s a check
mark next to you. So to cater to this; do whatever you can to show that other
people have believed in you enough to use your work and skills.

Aside from those two characteristics, there is another major factor – fit. The
hiring manager wants someone they and their team can work well with. All the
other stuff represents minimum hurdles for being considered. But you often
make or break your chances by being someone the team members want to know
better and work with all day long. Almost all hiring processes ask the full
team to evaluate a late-stage candidate.

So to summarize, hiring managers are usually looking for 3 main things:

  1. Capability
  2. Motivation
  3. Fit

You can learn a bit about the perspective of hiring managers by reading blog
posts about how to hire developers. No need to go crazy, but try to get a
picture of why they’re hiring you:

  1. [The Best Way to Hire Software Developers](http://insights.dice.com/2013/05/31/hiring-software-developers/)
  2. [How to Hire Talent](http://lifeofaprogrammanager.blogspot.com/2006/06/how-to-hire-talent.html)
  3. [Joel Spolsky has a lengthy diatribe on hiring developers](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/FindingGreatDevelopers.html), which should give you an idea of the need and pain of hiring great engineers.
  4. [Joel Spolsky’s Guerrilla Guide to Interviewing (version 3.0)](http://www.joelonsoftware.com/articles/GuerrillaInterviewing3.html). Look for “people who are 1. Smart, and 2. Get things done”.
  5. [Beyond a Resume: What Tech Recruiters Want](http://blog.udacity.com/2013/09/beyond-resume-what-tech-recruiters-want.html)

### Internships

A good way to start getting experience and show others that you’re employable
is to get an internship. Just make sure it’s a paid internship because no one
values things they get for free. You want the people you work with to value
your contributions and feel like they have a stake in helping you succeed. The
good part is that internships tend to focus more on your growth potential than
what you’ve done before, so you can start to avoid that chicken-and-egg
problem described above.

The hiring process for internships is usually similar to but not quite as
rigorous as full-time positions. Internships are basically just long
interviews by that company to see if they want to bring you on full-time.

These should be useful links for you:

  * [Thread on “How do I get a Software Internship” from MetaFilter](http://ask.metafilter.com/226621/How-do-I-get-a-software-internship)
  * [InternMatch](https://www.wayup.com/s/internships/it/)

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/getting_hired/preparing_for_job_search/what_companies_want.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-getting-hired-
what-companies-
want&template=suggestion.yaml&title=What+Companies+Want%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/getting-hired) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-getting-hired-what-
you-can-do-to-prepare)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

