Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![JavaScript](/assets/badge-
javascript-626af7075a7914bc4f30bd941268ed883785c3fb29b3e9d023eb5ab6450353bb.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/javascript)

#  Organizing Your Javascript Code Introduction

[

##  JavaScript Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/javascript)

### Organizing your JavaScript code

One of the most daunting parts of JavaScript is learning how to organize your
code. The reason this subject can be so overwhelming is _not_ because
JavaScript is so much more complex than other languages, but because it is
incredibly forgiving! Many languages force you into using specific patterns
and data structures in your code, but that is not true in JavaScript.

In the beginning, this is a great thing! For example, if you just want to make
a simple button on your webpage do something, you can set that up in a couple
lines of code. However, as your program becomes more complex, it can become
hard to maintain unless you take care to organize your code, and because
JavaScript is such a flexible language, how you do that is entirely up to you.
For many coders, making decisions about design patterns is crippling, so we’re
here to help.

This lesson series is going to cover a few of the most common design patterns
that occur in modern JavaScript code. We will discuss some pros and cons of
each pattern and will give you a chance to practice using each pattern in a
project.

The patterns we’ll be covering in this series are:

  * Plain Old JavaScript Objects and Object Constructors
  * Factory Functions and the Module Pattern
  * Classes
  * ES6 Modules

Going through these will give us a chance to learn about a few other important
concepts in JavaScript such as “closure”, “prototypes”, “IIFEs” and more! This
series covers the most important parts of JavaScript after simply learning the
basics of the language… are you ready?

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/javascript/organizing_your_javascript_code/organizing_your_javascript_code_introduction.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-javascript-
organizing-your-javascript-code-
introduction&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Organizing+Your+Javascript+Code+Introduction%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/javascript) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-javascript-objects-
and-object-constructors)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

