Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Getting Hired](/assets/badge-getting-
hired-03b3463749a1cd7dd5358c585b0c35c2878bbde91aa0800f641992eeb69f7c66.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-hired)

#  Applying for Web Development Jobs

[

##  Getting Hired Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-
hired)

### Introduction

The next step is to actually apply. Don’t send all your applications out at
once! You’ll get totally overwhelmed if you start hearing back from people and
need to complete tasks all at once. Treat it like an iterative process where
you’ll send out several applications each day, learn from any mistakes you can
identify based on feedback from the process, and try again the next day.

This is NOT an excuse to procrastinate or only send out one application a day.
You should have a definite goal for number of applications per day. 3? 5? 10?

Over time, you will work your way through your excel list. It’s usually good
to start at the bottom with the companies that you would barely work at. Once
you feel comfortable with your application-sending and hopefully interviewing
abilities, you can start tackling the companies at the top that you _really_
want to work for.

### Go in the side door

Where do you start? Do two things at once – send applications to a few
companies towards the bottom of your list to practice but also look at the top
companies on your list and build a strategy. Remember, the best way to get in
is to NOT use their online resume drop but to instead identify a real human
being at the company and connect with that person somehow. Even better is to
be so publicly brilliant that they come to you but… we can’t have it all.

So there are probably a few companies that you’d _really_ like to work for.
You’ll want to spend a lot more time on them than you would for the ones at
the bottom (which are hopefully good for interview practice). Not only should
you try to find a real human being at the company, but you can also
potentially get noticed by tailoring your project work to them. You’ll be
building projects (I hope) to stay in practice anyway, so make one of those a
clone of the top company’s website with a new feature you’d like to see, then
use that to display your interest.

Get to know the company and its needs and see if you can reach out to address
them somehow. Do they have local events you can visit? What do they sponsor?
This stuff takes creativity. You need to walk the line where you’re not a
stalker but you do care enough to push hard. If you’re wrong, they may say no.
It happens, you’ll live and move on. But you’d better try! You’ll probably
figure things out that will help you with other companies anyway.

  * [Getting noticed by a startup you want to work for](http://www.thedailymuse.com/job-search/want-to-work-for-a-start-up-heres-how-to-get-noticed/)

### Perseverance through the process

One of the key parts of the process, though, is keeping your spirits up. It
SUCKS looking for jobs full time. You can go weeks without hearing a peep from
anyone. Then you’ll have a day where you get an interview and your spirits
will soar and then you won’t pass and you’ll feel like crap again. Then you’ll
get another three interviews in one day and it’ll be crazy for a time before
another long waiting period. The inconsistency of it is maddening, so do what
you need to in your own life to make sure you don’t let it get you down.

It’s also really important to not act/sound desperate, even though you
probably are. No one wants to hire someone who is desperate because it
violates so much of the social proof that people use to figure out if you’re a
good candidate – if no one else will hire you and you’re so desperate, it
makes them wonder what’s wrong with you. And, frankly, there’s nothing wrong…
everyone goes through a grueling process when they start looking for jobs.
Just don’t let it get to you (or at least don’t make it sound like it’s gotten
to you).

The point here is really just to make sure you understand that it’s a really
annoying/painful/long process for everyone and you’re not alone!

### Resume versions

If you’re applying to several different types of positions, tailor your resume
for the specific type of opportunity. Just remember that, if you’re submitting
it virtually, they can see the title.

It’s also important to note that if you’re not gaining traction getting
responses with a certain resume, don’t be afraid to switch it up. Keep track
of the changes and see which version performs better than the others.

### Cover letters

Some positions require you to also submit cover letters. In our own
experience, we’ve rarely actually seen the cover letter that an applicant has
submitted for a job posting. They have a magical way of getting lost or
ignored. If someone’s spending < 10 seconds looking at your resume at first,
why are they going to read a long cover letter?

Though they may not look at your cover letter during the first pass, if your
resume looks interesting then the cover letter has a way of becoming more
important. The hiring manager wants to make sure the story he crafted in his
head is even more awesome in reality when hearing it from the applicant’s own
words. So it’s important to not use meaningless buzzwords and platitudes in
your cover letter but instead focus on providing a concise but descriptive
(and specific) letter answering the key questions we’ve talked about before
(are you capable and driven?).

It also needs to answer a new question that the resume doesn’t really address
directly: “Why does this person actually want to work at MY company?”. That’s
actually very important if it’s a startup or other strongly cultural
organization – they’re looking for people who have a very strong reason for
wanting to work there so they know you’ll stick around and grow with the
company.

### Email cover letters

Every piece of communication you have with a company is relevant. The most
important is the one where you first reach out via email. You probably want to
treat that as a condensed version of a cover letter – express your brilliance
and fit in just a few powerful sentences.

### Applying

Track every application you send out in your spreadsheet by the date you sent
it. As we said above, you don’t need to go crazy on Day 1 but keep a regular
flow of applications going out.

### Following up

Follow up on all applications you care about. Follow up once in the first few
days and again after a week or two if you haven’t heard anything. This
obviously works best if you’ve identified an individual at the company before,
but the point is that perseverance matters and it can help you display the
kind of drive you’re trying to show in your resume anyway.

This actually applies to the whole process, not just applications. Follow up
your interviews (with a thank you to your interviewer on day 1 too). Follow up
your tech screens. The goal here isn’t to be naggy and annoying/desperate, and
it’s certainly not to be a robot sending auto-generated emails all the time.
Just be human and honest and simple in your language.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/getting_hired/applying_and_interviewing/applying.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-getting-hired-
applying-for-web-development-
jobs&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Applying+for+Web+Development+Jobs%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/getting-hired) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-getting-hired-
preparing-to-interview-and-interviewing)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

