Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  Fundamentals Part 5

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

Congratulations on making it to one of the last lessons in Foundations! By
this point, you have learned many of the fundamentals of JavaScript. In this
lesson, you will learn about Objects - a collection of key-value pairs - as
well as some more powerful and commonly used array methods. Before you know
it, you’ll have a better understanding of how powerful objects and arrays are
and how both can be an indispensable part of your JavaScript tool kit!

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * Creating objects.
  * Accessing object properties.
  * Being able to use multiple object operators.
  * Being able to use some powerful array functions.

### Objects

Objects are a _very_ important part of the JavaScript language, and while for
the most part you can accomplish simple and even intermediate tasks without
worrying about them, any real project that you’re going to attempt is going to
feature Objects. The uses of Objects in JavaScript can get deep relatively
quickly, so for the moment we’re only going to cover the basics. There’ll be
an in-depth dive later.

  1. [This JavaScript.info](https://javascript.info/object) article is the best place to get started with Objects.
  2. [The MDN tutorial](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Objects/Basics) isn’t bad either, so check it out if you need another take on the subject.

### Intermediate/advanced array magic

Besides being a quick and handy way to store data, arrays also have a set of
functions for manipulating that data in very powerful ways. Once you begin to
master these functions you will start to see ways to use them all over the
place! There are really only a handful of these functions… but as you’ll soon
see, the possibilities of what you can do with them are near endless.

  1. Start out by watching [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HB1ZC7czKRs) from Wes Bos. To follow along, use your local Javascript30 repository. If you don’t have the repo yet, clone it from [here](https://github.com/wesbos/JavaScript30).
  2. Watch and code with [Part 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QNmRfyNg1lw) of Wes Bos’s array series.
  3. For a more comprehensive and in-depth guide to array methods in JavaScript, you can also check out this [array method guide](https://javascript.info/array-methods). This resource covers each method in detail, with examples and explanations of their usage.

### Assignment

  1. At this point you just need a little more practice! Go back to the [JavaScript exercises repository](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/javascript-exercises) that we introduced in the [Fundamentals Part 4](https://www.theodinproject.com/lessons/foundations-fundamentals-part-4) assignment. Review each README file prior to completing the following exercises in order: 
    * `08_calculator`
    * `09_palindromes`
    * `10_fibonacci`
    * `11_getTheTitles`
    * `12_findTheOldest`

Note: Solutions for these exercises can be found in the `solution` folder of
each exercise.

If you feel yourself getting overwhelmed or stuck, don’t be afraid to go back
and review or ask for help on our [Discord](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)!

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * [What is the difference between objects and arrays?](https://javascript.info/object#summary)
  * [How do you access object properties?](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Objects/Basics#bracket_notation)
  * [What is `Array.prototype.map()` useful for?](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HB1ZC7czKRs&t=233s)
  * [What is `Array.prototype.reduce()` useful for?](https://youtu.be/HB1ZC7czKRs?t=467)

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * Learn about the ‘arguments’ object on this [page about function parameters](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_function_parameters.asp).

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/foundations/javascript_basics/fundamentals-5.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-
fundamentals-
part-5&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Fundamentals+Part+5%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-calculator)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

