Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  Lists

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

Whether it be IMDB’s top 250 movies or the FBI’s most wanted, lists are
everywhere on the web and you are going to need one eventually in your
webpages.

Luckily, with HTML there are a couple of different types of lists at your
disposal.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * How to create an unordered list.
  * How to create an ordered list.

### Unordered lists

If you want to have a list of items where the order doesn’t matter, like a
shopping list of items that can be bought in any order, then you can use an
unordered list.

Unordered lists are created using the `<ul>` element, and each item within the
list is created using the list item element `<li>`.

Each list item in an unordered list begins with a bullet point:

See the Pen [ html-unordred-
list](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/powjajd) by TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

### Ordered lists

If you instead want to create a list of items where the order _does_ matter,
like step-by-step instructions for a recipe, or your top 10 favorite TV shows,
then you can use an ordered list.

Ordered lists are created using the `<ol>` element. Each individual item in
them is again created using the list item element `<li>`. However, each list
item in an ordered list begins with a number instead:

See the Pen [ html-ordered-
list](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples/pen/yLXYvYp) by TheOdinProject
([@TheOdinProjectExamples](https://codepen.io/TheOdinProjectExamples)) on
[CodePen](https://codepen.io).

### Assignment

To get some practice using lists, create a new HTML document and create the
following lists:

  1. An unordered shopping list of your favorite foods
  2. An ordered list of todo’s you need to get done today
  3. An unordered list of places you’d like to visit someday
  4. An ordered list of your all time top 5 favorite video games or movies

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * What HTML element is used to create an unordered list?
  * What HTML element is used to create an ordered list?
  * What HTML element is used to create list items within both unordered and ordered lists?

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [MDN documentation on the unordered list element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/ul)
  * [MDN documentation on the ordered list element](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/ol)
  * [Shay Howe’s HTML lists tutorial](https://learn.shayhowe.com/html-css/creating-lists/)

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/foundations/html_css/html-
foundations/lists.md) [ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-
lists&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Lists%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-links-and-images)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

