Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  Inspecting HTML and CSS

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

Being able to inspect and debug your HTML and CSS is critical to frontend
development. This lesson will take us through the Chrome Dev Tools, which
allow you to see detailed information about your elements and CSS rules, as
well as assist you in finding and fixing problems in your code.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this
lesson.

  * You will know how to access the element inspector.
  * You will know how to select and inspect specific elements.
  * You will know how to test out HTML and CSS in the inspector.

### The inspector

To open up the inspector, you can right-click on any element of a webpage and
click “Inspect” or press F12. Go ahead and do that right now to see the HTML
and CSS used on this page.

Don’t get overwhelmed with all the tools you’re now seeing! For this lesson,
we want to focus on the Elements and Styles panes.

### Inspecting elements

In the Elements pane, you can see the entire HTML structure of your page. You
can click on any of the elements in this pane to select that specific element.
Alternatively, you can click the blue-highlighted icon shown below on the
left, and hover over any element on the page.

[![Inspector
Icon](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/594984d7c9f9e744577f19ea475b3864e8cc7c91/html_css/v2/foundations/inspecting-
html-and-
css/imgs/01.png)](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/594984d7c9f9e744577f19ea475b3864e8cc7c91/html_css/v2/foundations/inspecting-
html-and-css/imgs/01.png)

When an element is selected, the Styles tab will show all the currently
applied styles, as well as any styles that are being overwritten (indicated by
a strikethrough of the text). For example, if you use the inspector to click
on the “Your Career in Web Development Starts Here” header on the TOP
homepage, on the right-hand side you’ll see all the styles that are currently
affecting the element, as seen below:

[![Overwritten
style](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/f8fd38fc62578d8e8368f5303126215a492847f0/foundations/html_css/inspecting-
html-and-
css/imgs/03.png)](https://cdn.statically.io/gh/TheOdinProject/curriculum/f8fd38fc62578d8e8368f5303126215a492847f0/foundations/html_css/inspecting-
html-and-css/imgs/03.png)

### Testing styles in the inspector

The Styles pane also allows you to edit styles directly in the browser. You
can click inside of any individual selector to add a new rule or click on an
existing attribute or value to alter it. When doing so, the webpage responds
with the changes in real-time. This won’t affect the source code in your text
editor, but it is extremely useful for quickly testing out various attributes
and values without needing to reload the page over and over again.

### Assignment

  1. Go through the following sections of the [official Chrome DevTools docs](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools):

    * [Overview](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/overview/): don’t navigate to any other pages linked here; just get familiar with _what_ tools are available in the DevTools, rather than how to use all of them right now.
    * [Open Chrome DevTools](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/open/): similar to what we went over above, but with some nice extras.
    * [Get Started With Viewing And Changing The DOM](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/dom/): skip through any part that uses the JavaScript console.
    * [View and change CSS](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/css): be sure to follow along with any interactive instructions!

### Knowledge check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this
lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it
and review the material it links to.

  * How do you select a specific element on your page with your browser’s developer tools?
  * What does a strikethrough in a CSS declaration mean in your browser’s developer tools?
  * How do you change CSS in real time on specific elements of a web page with your browser’s developer tools?

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [This article about how we can utilize css overview in the developer tools](https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/how-to-use-css-overview-in-chrome-developer-tools/) to check the colors, font styles, media-queries, etc. used on a particular webpage.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/foundations/html_css/css-
foundations/inspecting-html-and-css.md) [ Report an issueReport icon Report an
issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-inspecting-
html-and-
css&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Inspecting+HTML+and+CSS%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-the-box-model)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

