Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  Text Editors

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

A text editor is by far the most used developer tool regardless of what type
of developer you are. A good text editor can help you write better code with
real-time code checking, syntax highlighting, and automatic formatting.

### Why can’t I use Microsoft Word?

Rich text editors, such as Microsoft Word and Libre-Office Writer, are great
for writing a paper, but the features that make them good at creating nicely
formatted documents make them unsuitable for writing code. A document created
with these rich text editors has more than just text embedded in the file.
These files also contain information on how to display the text on the screen
and data on how to display graphics embedded into the document. In contrast,
plain text editors, such as VSCode and Sublime, don’t save any additional
information. Saving only the text allows other programs, like Ruby’s
interpreter, to read and execute the file as code.

### Code editors

You can think of code editors as specialized web development tools. They are
highly customizable and offer many features that will make your life easier.
There is nothing worse than spending 2 hours trying to figure out why your
program isn’t working only to realize that you missed a closing bracket.
Plugins, syntax highlighting, auto-closing of brackets and braces, and linting
are just a few of the benefits of using a code editor. There are many text
editors out there to choose from, but we suggest starting with Visual Studio
Code.

**Visual Studio Code** , or just VSCode as it’s commonly referred to, is an
excellent free code editor. It has outstanding add-on support and great Git
integration. VSCode is the most popular code editor among Odin’s students and
moderators, so support is easy to find in the community.

Which editor you use is generally a matter of preference, but for the purposes
of this course, we are going to assume you’re using VSCode, mainly because
it’s free, it’s easy to use, and it works pretty much the same on every
operating system. Keep in mind that this means you will not be able to get
help if you are using a different text editor other than VSCode for the
curriculum.

As a reminder, if you’re using a **virtual machine** , you should install
VSCode **on your VM**. You’re welcome to also install it on your host (i.e.,
your Windows main OS), but you’ll want to be sure that you have this critical
tool inside your VM.

### VSCode installation

Choose your Operating System:

Linux

#### Step 1: Download VSCode

  * Open your **Terminal**.
  * Run the following command to download the latest **VSCode** `.deb` package:

    
    
    wget -O code-latest.deb 'https://code.visualstudio.com/sha/download?build=stable&os=linux-deb-x64'
    

#### Step 2: Install VSCode

  * Enter the following command in your terminal to install the **VSCode** `.deb` package:

    
    
    sudo apt install ./code-latest.deb
    

  * If prompted, enter your password.

You might see a notice starting with `N: Download is performed unsandboxed
(...)`. You don’t need to worry about it. [Read this reddit post for more
information.](https://www.reddit.com/r/linux4noobs/comments/ux6cwx/comment/i9x2twx/))_

#### Step 3: Delete the installer file

    
    
    rm code-latest.deb
    

#### Step 4: Using VSCode

You can start VSCode in two ways,

  * Click **Visual Studio Code** from the Applications menu.
  * **Or** , use the `code` command from the terminal.

    
    
    code
    

MacOS

#### Step 1: Download VSCode

  * Click [this link](https://code.visualstudio.com/sha/download?build=stable&os=darwin-universal) to automatically download the latest VSCode installer .zip file.

#### Step 2: Install VSCode

  * Open the **Downloads** folder.
  * Double click the file **VSCode-darwin-universal.zip**.
  * Drag the **Visual Studio Code.app** icon to the **Applications** folder icon.

#### Step 3: Delete the installer file

  * Open **Finder**.
  * Go to the **Downloads** folder.
  * Drag **VSCode-darwin-universal.zip** to the trash.

#### Step 4: Using VSCode

  * Go to your **Applications** folder.
  * Double click **Visual Studio Code**.

WSL

#### Step 1: Install VSCode

  * Follow the instructions for [Visual Studio Code on Windows](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/setup/windows) to install VSCode.

#### Step 2: Delete the installer file

  * Open **File Explorer**.
  * Go to the **Downloads** folder.
  * Drag **VSCodeUserSetup-{version}.exe** to the trash.

#### Step 4: Install WSL Extension

  * Open Visual Studio Code.
  * Navigate to the extensions tab.
  * Find and install the [WSL extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.remote-wsl).

#### Step 5: Ensure that WSL can correctly open VSCode

  * Open a new WSL terminal.
  * Run the following command to open a new VSCode window.
    
        code
    

  * After a few moments a new VSCode window should open, and VSCode should provide a notification that its opening in WSL.

### Assignment

  1. Familiarizing yourself with VSCode will allow you to save time and become more productive. By watching this [VSCode Tutorial for Beginners](https://youtu.be/ORrELERGIHs?t=103) video, you’ll get an idea of all the features VSCode has to offer. Don’t worry about actually coding along, just watch for the way that VSCode is used throughout the video.

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * [VSCode docs](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs) are a great place to refer to for any of your queries related to VSCode.
  * These handy little PDFs on VSCode’s [shortcuts for linux](https://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/?linkid=832144) and [shortcuts for macOS](https://go.microsoft.com/fwlink/?linkid=832143) are a great resource to help make your VSCode experience smoother and more efficient.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/foundations/installations/text_editors.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-text-
editors&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Text+Editors%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Next lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson
](/lessons/foundations-command-line-basics)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

