Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Getting Hired](/assets/badge-getting-
hired-03b3463749a1cd7dd5358c585b0c35c2878bbde91aa0800f641992eeb69f7c66.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-hired)

#  It Starts with YOU

[

##  Getting Hired Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/getting-
hired)

### Introduction

This lesson is all about self-assessment and goal-setting. If you don’t
understand yourself, you won’t be happy with where you end up. Taking some
time to introspect can make the process of getting hired a more manageable and
strategic process.

### Where you are now

Without defining what your own needs are, you will have no way of determining
the right path forward so hunker down until you’ve got an idea of what your
key needs are right now (from a job). The questions below should help you
think about what is actually essential for you versus nice-to-have. Ask
yourself:

  * Why do I _need_ a job?
  * What kind of salary level do I need to sustain myself and my family?
  * What kind of job security level do I need to sustain myself and my family?
  * How desperate am I to get a job _right now_?

### Where you want to be

Once you’ve been honest with yourself about your needs, it’s time to figure
out what you _want_. What will your future needs be? What kinds of companies
do you want to work at?

  * Why do I _want_ a job in web development?
  * What kind of career path do I want to have?
  * Do I want to work in a developer-led organization (vs sales- or business-led)?
  * Do I prefer working in a team environment or remotely?
  * Do I like working long hours / weekends or 9-6?
  * Is the work more important than the people?
  * Do I have to care about the product I’m building?
  * Do I have to care about the technologies I’m using?
  * Do I prefer an “easy” work environment or one where I’m constantly pushed?
  * Do I want “creature comfort” incentives like free food and beer at the office?
  * Do I have to enjoy my work or can I power through a crappy job?

### Prioritizing needs and wants

You should have at least an informal list of the things that matter to you.
Now ruthlessly rank them. What are your non-negotiables and what are your
nice-to-haves? Every company and opportunity will fall somewhere on the
spectrum defined by those questions and they are the criteria you will later
use to evaluate them. This will help you stay focused when considering
opportunities and not spread yourself too thin chasing things that you
wouldn’t really choose anyway.

Make sure you know every one of your “must-haves” and your top 5 priorities
for “nice-to-haves” in a job.

### What are your assets and liabilities?

It’s time to be honest with yourself… what do you bring to the table? If
you’re early in your career (which you probably are), you’ll have to work hard
to distinguish yourself from the flood of unqualified candidates out there.
You need to strike the line between being honest with yourself and not selling
yourself short. Everyone, especially those just starting out, feels
unqualified. That’s natural, so don’t worry about it. This is about figuring
out your strengths and weaknesses so you can tailor your story to play to your
strengths and honestly address your weaknesses.

Some questions to ask (which you’ll probably hear again in your early
interviews):

  1. How hungry am I?
  2. How good am I at building back end code?
  3. How good am I at putting together front ends?
  4. Can I solve really technical problems like brain teasers and algorithms?
  5. Have I built projects that display a good range of skills?
  6. Do I know people who can recommend me?
  7. Am I a good people person who builds relationships easily?
  8. Do I portray an aura of confidence or act shy?
  9. Do I tend to undersell myself and my capabilities?
  10. Do I have a broad level of general tech knowledge?
  11. Am I very familiar with a particular technical or industry vertical? (Usually career switchers have one)
  12. Do I tend to procrastinate or do I just get shit done?
  13. Do I wait to ask for help or do I go out and find the answer on my own?
  14. Do I lean in to challenges or avoid them?
  15. What are some really difficult problems I’ve solved before?

Applying without much experience means you need to fill in your weak spots and
emphasize your strengths. For almost everyone, your biggest strength will be
hunger and ability to learn. But companies have heard that story before, so
you’ll have to tie in other strengths that you can use to make your story
compelling.

A quick note – there is a difference between hunger for opportunity and
desperation. Hunger is about seeking reward (which you can do when you’re in a
comfortable situation and optimizing opportunities) and desperation is about
avoiding failure (which occurs when you absolutely MUST have that job). Do
whatever it takes to not sound desperate, even if you are.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/getting_hired/preparing_for_job_search/starts_with_you.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnode-path-getting-hired-
it-starts-with-
you&template=suggestion.yaml&title=It+Starts+with+YOU%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/getting-hired) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/node-path-getting-hired-what-
companies-want)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

