Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![NodeJS](/assets/badge-
nodejs-1432a58382afd13f5bf55d4e5eda07244a3aa5fae9cee98ea034f17d6a09d503.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

#  Project: Basic Informational Site

[

##  NodeJS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

### A simple Node website!

By now you should know enough to be dangerous. There’s _definitely_ more to
learn but you already know enough about Node to actually make something! So
let’s do it! You will be creating a very basic informational site that
contains 4 pages: index, about, contact-me and 404. Keep in mind that the
content of these pages isn’t really all that important. So there’s no need to
spend a lot of time filling them up or trying to make them look pretty.

If you get stuck at anytime, feel free to go back to the tutorial from the
previous lesson.

### Assignment

  1. Make a project directory and create the following files inside that directory: 
    * index.html
    * about.html
    * contact-me.html
    * 404.html
  2. Create your node.js server file `index.js` and add the code needed to serve the right page according to the url. 
    * [localhost:8080](http://localhost:8080) should take users to index.html
    * [localhost:8080/about](http://localhost:8080/about) should take users to about.html
    * [localhost:8080/contact-me](http://localhost:8080/contact-me) should take users to contact-me.html
    * 404.html should display any time the user tries to go to a page not listed above.

### Submitting a solution

If you’re planning to submit a live demo with your student solution, one of
the easiest ways to do that is using Replit. To do this:

  1. Go to [replit.com](https://replit.com)
  2. Create a new repl
  3. Select Node.js as the language
  4. Enter the url for your submission github repo and click “Import from GitHub”
  5. Click the “Run” button and you should get the URL to your demo in the URL bar of the repl’s web view.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/nodeJS/introduction_to_nodeJS/project_basic_informational_site.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnodejs-basic-
informational-
site&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Basic+Informational+Site%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

Only logged in users can view user submissions for this project

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/nodejs) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/nodejs-introduction-to-mongodb)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

