Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![Foundations](/assets/badge-
foundations-4a1f6ae4009e6156a289aef0a3897283ff0e3fe1af6b5795aaf7260619dc11f4.svg)
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

#  Choose Your Path Forward

[

##  Foundations Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/foundations/courses/foundations)

### Introduction

That was quite a journey. Take a second and reflect on the fact that you’ve
just learned the basics of at least three different languages and, if you had
to, you could probably hack together a web page on your own already.

You should be fairly comfortable typing commands into your computer’s command
line and you should understand what happens when you enter a web address into
your browser and it returns a functioning page. You should be able to create a
basic web page and make it do some basic things with JavaScript. Finally, you
should have a clear understanding of how all this fits together in your future
as a builder of web applications.

With what you know already you could start putting together some basic
websites, but we’re here to help you get a lot further than that. We want to
bring you to the point where you can confidently build a full-featured and
scalable web application, either on your own, or working as a developer in a
top-tier tech company.

You’ve come a long way up the learning curve but there is so much more cool
stuff that you’ll learn to do, and now is the time to decide which path you
want to take. Either Ruby with Ruby on Rails or JavaScript with Node/Express.
Both paths will guide you in building skills, building up a portfolio of
projects, and becoming a great developer. There is no right answer here on
what is the best path. Learning multiple languages can help you become a well-
rounded developer, but sticking with one could make you more of an expert in a
particular language. Both paths will help you become a great developer. The
important thing is to not switch halfway through; this will only set you back.

Learning how to program is **much** more than just learning a language. It’s
about learning how to research and solve difficult problems, building an
engineering mindset, working on complex problems and codebases, communicating
effectively with other developers, and **much** more. Luckily, all these
skills are transferable to other languages and domains of software and because
most languages are similar in concept and structure, moving into a different
language will be much easier than learning your first.

Arguments about learning the languages used in your area may sound convincing,
but because a _good_ developer can transfer skills easily, what you learn
isn’t going to massively change outcomes of getting a job. Though, if you
cannot shake that fear, do whatever you need – even if that includes
researching your area to see what jobs are available locally (don’t forget
about remote jobs, though). A good course is far more important than the
language you learn first.

To help you make a decision, here are some perks of each technology:

### Ruby and Ruby on Rails

  * Opinionated 
    * You don’t have to make decisions on the structure of your projects. This helps when moving into projects built by others.
    * You will learn things “The Ruby Way”, which can help you write clean code in other languages as well.
  * Elegant 
    * Brings a lot of tools to help you develop things in a way that makes your code easy to read.
    * Oftentimes solutions in Ruby are much more concise than in other languages.
  * Rapid development 
    * Rails helps you build applications very quickly. This means you can make a greater number of interesting projects than others in the same time frame.
  * Single paradigm 
    * Object-oriented programming (OOP) is the Ruby way; many other languages are primarily OOP-based.

### JavaScript - Node & Express

  * Un-opinionated 
    * There is no standard way of doing things. You are going to have to decide the structure of projects yourself, for better or worse.
  * Very fast 
    * Because JavaScript utilises JIT (Just-In-Time) compilation, it can do calculations very quickly.
  * Verbose 
    * There is no magic involved with these technologies. You will have to understand everything to make sense of it.
    * Helps you get closer to how the computer is actually reading your code.
  * Same language on both front end and back end 
    * Keeping the language consistent can help with writing consistent code across your entire application.
    * Allows you to do some cool things, like writing code that runs on both the browser and the server for optimization purposes.

In the end, it doesn’t matter which path you take. It’s only important that
you stick with it, and continue to hold onto the learner’s mindset throughout
your career. Not convinced? [Click here](https://medium.com/@bycdiaz/choosing-
the-right-language-a-short-guide-on-how-not-to-ruin-your-career-2b353be1371).

### Still can’t decide? Let the spinner settle your fate!

Feel free to share the results in chat!

Get ready, because this is only the beginning. Now it’s time to delve deeper
into the areas covered by Foundations. There are some fantastic projects in
the courses that follow which will challenge you to the limit, but you’ll come
out the other side ready to go and make your mark in the programming world.

The journey has just begun!

### Additional resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so
consider it supplemental.

  * If you are still confused, Check out this article to get more facts, pros and cons about both languages [Ruby on Rails vs Javascript.](https://cloudinfrastructureservices.co.uk/ruby-on-rails-vs-javascript-whats-the-difference/).

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/foundations/tying_it_all_together/conclusion.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Ffoundations-choose-your-
path-
forward&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Choose+Your+Path+Forward%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

[ View courseGo to course page View Course
](/paths/foundations/courses/foundations) [Sign in to track
progress](/sign_in) [ Choose pathGo to paths page Choose Path
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

