Close sidebar

[ Odin Logo ](/)

[ Home icon Home ](/) [ All Paths icon All Paths
](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [ About icon About ](/about) [ Support
Us icon Support Us ](/support_us) [ Community icon Community
](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB)

* * *

[ Get started icon Get started ](/sign_up) [ theme icon Light mode
](/themes?theme=dark) [ Sign in icon Sign in ](/sign_in)

[ ![Odin Logo](/assets/icons/odin-
icon-a34029cd84a741be4da27758dafd7d7ac3729021adea3e0701e310d91e5c1d04.svg)
](/) [ Odin Logo ](/)

[All Paths](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths) [About](/about)
[Community](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [Support us](/support_us) [Sign
in](/sign_in) [ theme icon ](/themes?theme=dark) [Get Started](/sign_up)

Open mobile menu Open mobile menu button

[ ![NodeJS](/assets/badge-
nodejs-1432a58382afd13f5bf55d4e5eda07244a3aa5fae9cee98ea034f17d6a09d503.svg)
](/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

#  Project: Express 105: Forms and Deployment

[

##  NodeJS Course

](https://www.theodinproject.com/paths/full-stack-javascript/courses/nodejs)

### Introduction

This lesson picks up where the last one left off and has you creating the rest
of your views. You’ll be focusing on the forms needed to create and update new
entries in your database. With the knowledge you pick up here, you’ll really
be ready to go create your own data-driven web applications. There is, of
course, more to learn, but finishing this one is a _big_ step towards actually
being able to do your own projects.

It’s another long multi-part tutorial, with plenty of useful information
scattered throughout. Be sure to take your time and read everything!

This is the last lesson on the MDN tutorial. The last step, listed below takes
you through what you need to do to actually deploy your project so you can
share it and show it off, so be sure to link it up in the student solutions
below!

### Learning outcomes

By the end of this lesson, you should be able to do the following:

  * Describe form handling process.
  * Describe validation and sanitization.
  * Describe routes.
  * Work with HTML forms in Express using Pug.
  * Use forms to get data from users and update the database with this data.
  * Validate and sanitize input using express-validator.
  * Write forms to create, update, and delete records from the database.
  * Add basic forms and form-handling code to Node websites.

### Assignment

  1. Let’s get back to [the tutorial](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Server-side/Express_Nodejs/forms).
  2. Read about deploying your app in the [last article](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Server-side/Express_Nodejs/deployment) in this tutorial.

Reminder: Make sure to hide your MongoDB connection URL! Once you’ve hosted
your app on Railway you’ll be creating a new database with them and can use
the instructions in the MDN tutorial to manage environment variables through
the Railway dashboard.

[ Improve on GitHub Github logo icon Improve on GitHub
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/edit/main/nodeJS/express_and_mongoose/project_express_105_forms_and_deployment.md)
[ Report an issueReport icon Report an issue
](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/issues/new?labels=Status%3A+Needs+Triage&lesson-
link=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theodinproject.com%2Flessons%2Fnodejs-
express-105-forms-and-
deployment&template=suggestion.yaml&title=Express+105%3A+Forms+and+Deployment%3A+%3CShort+description+of+your+suggestion%3E)

#### Lesson contents

Only logged in users can view user submissions for this project

[ View courseGo to course page View Course ](/paths/full-stack-
javascript/courses/nodejs) [Sign in to track progress](/sign_in) [ Next
lessonGo to next lesson Next Lesson ](/lessons/nodejs-inventory-application)

## Footer

# Support us!

## The Odin Project is funded by the community. Join us in empowering learners
around the globe by supporting The Odin Project!

[Learn more](/support_us) [ Donate now
](https://opencollective.com/theodinproject/donate?amount=5)

[ Odin Logo ](/)

High quality coding education maintained by an open source community.

[ GitHub GitHub GitHub logo ](https://github.com/TheOdinProject) [ Discord
Discord Discord logo ](https://discord.gg/fbFCkYabZB) [ Facebook Facebook
Facebook logo ](https://www.facebook.com/theodinproject/) [ Twitter Twitter
Twitter logo ](https://twitter.com/TheOdinProject)

### About us

  * [About](/about)
  * [Team](/team)
  * [Blog](/blog)
  * [Success Stories](/success_stories)

### Support

  * [FAQ](/faq)
  * [Contribute](/contributing)
  * [Contact us](/about#contact-us)

### Guides

  * [Community guides](/guides/community)
  * [Installation guides](/guides/installations)

### Legal

  * [Terms](/terms_of_use)
  * [Privacy](/privacy-policy)

(C) 2023 The Odin Project. All rights reserved.

